@c $Id: ack.texi 21228 2007-06-20 10:18:03Z lha $

@node  Acknowledgments, , Migration, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@appendix Acknowledgments

Eric Young wrote ``libdes''. Heimdal used to use libdes, without it
kth-krb would never have existed. Since there are no longer any Eric
Young code left in the library, we renamed it to libhcrypto.

All functions in libhcrypto have been re-implemented or used available
public domain code. The core AES function where written by Vincent
Rijmen, Antoon Bosselaers and Paulo Barreto.  The core DES SBOX
transformation was written by Richard Outerbridge. @code{imath} that
is used for public key crypto support is written by Michael
J. Fromberger.

The University of California at Berkeley initially wrote @code{telnet},
and @code{telnetd}.  The authentication and encryption code of
@code{telnet} and @code{telnetd} was added by David Borman (then of Cray
Research, Inc).  The encryption code was removed when this was exported
and then added back by Juha Eskelinen.

The @code{popper} was also a Berkeley program initially.

Some of the functions in @file{libroken} also come from Berkeley by way
of NetBSD/FreeBSD.

@code{editline} was written by Simmule Turner and Rich Salz. Heimdal
contains a modifed copy.

The @code{getifaddrs} implementation for Linux was written by Hideaki
YOSHIFUJI for the Usagi project.

The @code{pkcs11.h} headerfile was written by the Scute project.

Bugfixes, documentation, encouragement, and code has been contributed by:
@table @asis
@item Alexander Boström
@item Andreaw Bartlett
@item Björn Sandell
@item Brandon S. Allbery KF8NH
@item Brian A May
@item Chaskiel M Grundman
@item Cizzi Storm
@item Daniel Kouril
@item David Love
@item Derrick J Brashear
@item Douglas E Engert
@item Frank van der Linden
@item Jason McIntyre
@item Johan Ihrén
@item Jun-ichiro itojun Hagino
@item Ken Hornstein
@item Magnus Ahltorp
@item Marc Horowitz
@item Mario Strasser
@item Mark Eichin
@item Mattias Amnefelt
@item Michael B Allen
@item Michael Fromberger
@item Michal Vocu
@item Miroslav Ruda
@item Petr Holub
@item Phil Fisher
@item Rafal Malinowski
@item Richard Nyberg
@item Åke Sandgren 
@item and we hope that those not mentioned here will forgive us.
@end table

All bugs were introduced by ourselves.
