.\"
.\" (c) Copyright 1995 Wolfram Schneider. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"    This product includes software developed by Wolfram Schneider
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" /usr/bin/catman - preformat man pages
.\"
.\"   E-mail: Wolfram Schneider <wosch@cs.tu-berlin.de>
.\"
.\" $Id: catman.1,v 1.6 1996/01/23 21:09:39 joerg Exp $
.\"

.Dd Mar 12, 1995
.Dt CATMAN 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm catman
.Nd preformat man pages

.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm catman
.Op Fl f | Fl force
.Op Fl h | Fl help
.Op Fl p | Fl print
.Op Fl r | Fl remove
.Op Fl v | Fl verbose
.Op Ar directories...

.Sh DESCRIPTION 
.Nm Catman
format man pages to ASCII.  It's like typing
.Sq man program
for all man pages in 
.Ar directories .
.Ar Directories
is a list of man directories or subdirectories separated
by spaces or colons.
Use 
.Ar /usr/share/man
if no 
.Ar directories
defined.

.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds

.It Fl f , Fl force
Force overwriting old cat pages.  Normally only those pages will be formatted
which are not up to date.  This option is a waste of time, CPU and RAM.

.It Fl h , Fl help
Print options and exit.

.It Fl p , Fl print
Don't actually format man pages. Show what would be done.

.It Fl r , Fl remove
Remove garbage, e.\& g. catpage without manpage, uncompressed catpage but
a compressed catpage exist, filenames with non-alphanumeric
characters, uncompressed manpage but a compressed manpage exist.

.It Fl v , Fl verbose
More warnings.


.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
.Dl $ catman
.Pp
Format man pages in
.Ar /usr/share/man
if neccessary.

.Pp
.Dl $ catman $MANPATH
.Pp
Format all your man pages if neccessary.

.Pp
.Dl $ catman -f /usr/local/man/man1 /usr/local/man/manl
.Pp
Force reformatting of all man pages in
.Pa /usr/local/man/man1
and
.Pa /usr/local/man/manl .

.Pp
.Dl $ catman -p /usr/X11/man
.Pp
Show only.

.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/master.passwdxx -compact
.Pa /etc/weekly :
start this program
.Po
or
.Pa /etc/daily
.Pc
.El

.Sh FEATURES
Very fast if all man pages already formatted.

Does not support the
.Fl w
option as some other systems do.  Use
.Xr makewhatis 1
to rebuild the
.Ql whatis
database.
.Sh BUGS
.Xr man 1
is a setuid program.  Be careful that user
.Sq man
has write permissions to the catman directories.

.Nm Catman
does not check for any
.Sq .so
in man page sources.  Use hard or symlinks
to avoid redundant formatted man pages.

.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr manpath 1 ,
.Xr makewhatis 1 .

.Sh HISTORY
This version of
.Nm catman
command appeared in FreeBSD 2.1

.Sh AUTHOR
Wolfram Schneider
.Aq wosch@cs.tu-berlin.de ,
Germany.
