.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2016,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_kernel.3x,v 1.89 2025/08/16 19:50:07 tom Exp $
.TH curs_kernel 3X 2025-08-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.SH NAME
\fB\%def_prog_mode\fP,
\fB\%def_shell_mode\fP,
\fB\%reset_prog_mode\fP,
\fB\%reset_shell_mode\fP,
\fB\%resetty\fP,
\fB\%savetty\fP,
\fB\%getsyx\fP,
\fB\%setsyx\fP,
\fB\%curs_set\fP,
\fB\%mvcur\fP,
\fB\%napms\fP,
\fB\%ripoffline\fP \-
low-level \fIcurses\fR routines
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint def_prog_mode(void);
\fBint def_shell_mode(void);
.PP
\fBint reset_prog_mode(void);
\fBint reset_shell_mode(void);
.PP
\fBint resetty(void);
\fBint savetty(void);
.PP
\fBvoid getsyx(int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP);
\fBvoid setsyx(int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP);
.PP
\fBint curs_set(int \fIvisibility\fP);
\fBint mvcur(int \fIoldrow\fP, int \fIoldcol\fP, int \fInewrow\fP, int \fInewcol\fP);
\fBint napms(int \fIms\fP);
\fBint ripoffline(int \fIline\fP, int (*\fIinit\fP)(WINDOW *, int));
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The following routines give low-level access
to various \fBcurses\fP capabilities.
These routines typically are used inside library routines.
.SS "def_prog_mode, def_shell_mode"
The \fBdef_prog_mode\fP and \fBdef_shell_mode\fP routines save the
current terminal modes as the \*(``program\*(''
(in \fBcurses\fP) or \*(``shell\*(''
(not in \fBcurses\fP) state for use by the \fBreset_prog_mode\fP and
\fBreset_shell_mode\fP routines.
This is done automatically by \fBinitscr\fP.
There is one such save area for each screen context
allocated by \fBnewterm\fP.
.SS "reset_prog_mode, reset_shell_mode"
The \fBreset_prog_mode\fP and \fBreset_shell_mode\fP routines restore
the terminal to \*(``program\*('' (in \fBcurses\fP) or \*(``shell\*('' (out of
\fBcurses\fP) state.
These are done automatically by \fBendwin\fP(3X) and,
after an \fBendwin\fP, by \fBdoupdate\fP,
so they normally are not called.
.SS "resetty, savetty"
The \fBresetty\fP and \fBsavetty\fP routines save and restore the
state of the terminal modes.
\fBsavetty\fP saves the current state in
a buffer and \fBresetty\fP restores the state to what it was at the
last call to \fBsavetty\fP.
.SS getsyx
.B \%getsyx
stores the coordinates of virtual screen
.RB \%( newscr )
cursor in
.I y
and
.IR x "."
If
.BR \%newscr 's
\fB\%leaveok\fP(3X) output option is
.BR TRUE ","
.B \%getsyx
stores
.B \-1
in both
.I y
and
.IR x "."
If lines have been removed from the top of the screen using
.BR \%ripoffline ","
.I y
includes these lines;
therefore,
.I y
and
.I x
populated by
.B \%getsyx
should be used only as arguments for
.BR \%setsyx "."
.PP
Few applications use this feature;
most call \fB\%getyx\fP(3X) instead.
.SS setsyx
.B \%setsyx
sets the virtual screen
.RB \%( newscr )
cursor location to
.RI ( y ,
.IR x ")."
.B "\%setsyx(\-1, \-1)"
is equivalent to
.BR "\%leaveok(newscr, TRUE)" "."
.PP
.B \%getsyx
and
.B \%setsyx
are designed to be used by a function that manipulates
.I curses
windows but seeks to avoid changing the cursor position.
Such a function would first call
.BR \%getsyx ","
modify its windows' content,
call \fB\%wnoutrefresh\fP(3X) on them,
call
.BR \%setsyx ","
then call \fB\%doupdate\fP(3X).
.PP
Few applications use this feature;
most call \fB\%wmove\fP(3X) instead.
.SS curs_set
.B \%curs_set
adjusts the cursor visibility to
\*(``invisible\*('',
\*(``visible\*('',
\*(``very visible\*('',
as its argument is
.BR 0 ,
.BR 1 ,
or
.BR 2 ,
respectively.
It returns the previous
.I visibility
if the requested one is supported,
and
.B ERR
otherwise.
.SS mvcur
.B \%mvcur
provides low-level cursor motion.
It takes effect immediately,
rather than at the next refresh.
Unlike the other low-level output functions,
which either write to the standard output stream
or are passed a function pointer to perform output,
.B \%mvcur
uses a file descriptor derived from the output stream parameter of
\fB\%newterm\fP(3X).
.PP
One application of
.B \%mvcur
accompanies the temporary use of another program to write to the
terminal screen.
For example,
first call \fB\%refresh\fP(3X) to ensure that the screen and the
library's model of it are up to date;
then call
.BR \%reset_shell_mode ";"
write to the screen with the external application;
call
.BR \%reset_prog_mode ";"
and finally call
.BR \%mvcur( ".\|.\|." ,
.RB .\|.\|. ,
.B \-1, \-1)
to move the terminal cursor to where
.I \%curses
thinks it is,
since the library has no knowledge of how the external application
moved it.
.\" https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/bug-ncurses/2016-10/msg00002.html
.SS napms
.B \%napms
sleeps for
.I ms
milliseconds.
If
.I ms
exceeds 30,000
(thirty seconds),
.I \%ncurses
caps it at that value.
.SS ripoffline
.B \%ripoffline
provides access to the same facility that \fB\%slk_init\fP(3X) uses to
reduce the size of the screen.
The application must call
.B \%ripoffline
before \fB\%initscr\fP(3X) or \fB\%newterm\fP(3X)
so that the latter functions prepare a
.B \%stdscr
of the correct size.
.bP
If
.I line
is positive,
.B \%ripoffline
removes a line from the top of what will become
.BR \%stdscr "."
.bP
If
.I line
is negative,
.B \%ripoffline
removes a line from the bottom of what will become
.BR \%stdscr "."
.PP
When
.B \%initscr
initializes
.IR curses ","
it calls the
.I init
function supplied to
.B \%ripoffline
by the application with two arguments:
.bP
a pointer to the one-line
.I \%WINDOW
that it allocates,
and
.bP
an integer with the number of columns in the window.
.PP
Inside this
.I init
function,
the values of the integer variables
.B LINES
and
.B COLS
(see \fB\%curs_variables\fP(3X))
are not guaranteed to be reliable;
it must not call \fB\%wrefresh\fP(3X) or \fB\%doupdate\fP(3X).
A \fB\%wnoutrefresh\fP(3X) call is permissible.
.PP
.B \%ripoffline
can be called up to five times before
.B \%initscr
or
.BR \%newterm "."
.SH RETURN VALUE
Except for
.BR \%curs_set ","
these functions return
.B OK
on success and
.B ERR
on failure.
.PP
.B \%curs_set
returns the previous cursor visibility,
and returns
.B ERR
if the terminal type does not support the requested
.IR visibility "."
.PP
.B \%napms
always succeeds.
.PP
.B \%mvcur
fails if the position
.RI ( newrow ,
.IR newcol )
is outside the screen boundaries.
.PP
In
.IR \%ncurses ","
.bP
.BR \%def_prog_mode ","
.BR \%def_shell_mode ","
.BR \%reset_prog_mode ","
and
.B \%reset_shell_mode
return
.B ERR
if the terminal was not initialized,
or if the operating system's function for obtaining terminal settings
fails.
.bP
.B \%ripoffline
returns
.B ERR
if the accumulated quantity of ripped-off lines
would exceed the maximum (5).
.SH NOTES
.B \%getsyx
is a macro;
use of the
.B &
operator before its arguments is unnecessary.
.PP
The
.B \%endwin
function of both
.I \%ncurses
and SVr4
.I curses
calls
.B \%curs_set
if the latter has previously been called to set the cursor visibility
to a value other than normal;
that is,
either
invisible or very visible.
There is no way for
.I \%ncurses
to determine the initial cursor visibility to restore it.
.PP
.I \%ncurses
imposes a limit of 30 seconds on a delay requested of
.BR \%napms .
.PP
While the
.I init
function called by
.B \%ripoffline
is specified to return an
.IR int ","
.I \%ncurses
pays no attention to its return value.
.PP
If
.B \%ripoffline
cannot allocate memory for the required
.I \%WINDOW
structure backing the ripped-off line,
it stores a null pointer to the
.I \%WINDOW
pointer argument supplied by the
.I init
function the application specifies.
The application must check this argument for validity after calling
.B \%initscr
and prior to performing
.I curses
operations on that window.
.SH EXTENSIONS
In
.IR \%ncurses ","
.B \%mvcur
accepts
.B \-1
for either or both old coordinates.
This value tells
.I \%ncurses
that the old location is unknown,
and that it must use only absolute motion,
as with the
.B \%cursor_address
.RB ( cup )
capability,
rather than the least costly combination of absolute and relative
motion.
.SH PORTABILITY
Applications employing
.I \%ncurses
extensions should condition their use on the visibility of the
.B \%NCURSES_VERSION
preprocessor macro.
.PP
The
.I "virtual screen"
functions
.I \%setsyx
and
.I \%getsyx
are not described in X/Open Curses Issue\ 4.
SVr4 documents each of them
as returning an
.IR int "."
This is misleading,
as they are macros with no documented semantics for returning values.
.PP
All other functions are as described in X/Open Curses.
It specifies no error conditions for them,
except as described for
.I \%curs_set
in section \*(``RETURN VALUE\*('' above.
.PP
The System\ V Interface Definition,
Version 4 (1995),
specified all of these functions except
.I \%curs_set
as returning
.IR OK "."
.\" SVID 4, vol 3., p. 518
.PP
Older SVr4 man pages warn that the return value of
.I \%curs_set
\*(``is currently incorrect\*(''.
This implementation gets it right,
but counting on its correctness anywhere else may be unwise.
.PP
X/Open Curses specifies
.I \%ripoffline
as returning
.I OK
with no possibility of failure
(\*(``[c]alls to
.I \%ripoffline
above this limit
[five lines]
have no effect but report success\*('').
.PP
X/Open Curses notes:
.RS
.PP
After use of
.IR \%mvcur "(),"
the model Curses maintains of the state of the terminal might not
match the actual state of the terminal.
An application should touch and refresh the window before
resuming conventional use of Curses.
.RE
.PP
Both
.I \%ncurses
and SVr4
.I curses
implement
.I \%mvcur
using the
.I SCREEN
object allocated in either \fB\%initscr\fP(3X) or \fB\%newterm\fP(3X).
X/Open Curses states that the old location must be given for
.I \%mvcur
to accommodate terminals that lack absolute cursor positioning.
.\" X/Open Curses Issue 7, p. 161
.PP
If interrupted by a signal,
.I \%ncurses
restarts
.IR \%napms "."
That,
and the limitation to 30 seconds,
differ from other implementations.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_initscr\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_outopts\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_refresh\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_scr_dump\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_slk\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_variables\fP(3X)
