.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1999-2010,2016 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: infotocap.1m,v 1.52 2025/10/04 20:10:32 tom Exp $
.TH @INFOTOCAP@ 1M 2025-10-04 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "User commands"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.SH NAME
\fB\%@INFOTOCAP@\fP \-
convert a \fI\%terminfo\fR description into a \fI\%termcap\fR description
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B @INFOTOCAP@
.RI [ tic-option ]
.I file
\&.\|.\|.
.P
.B "@INFOTOCAP@ \-V"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B \%@INFOTOCAP@
translates terminal descriptions.
It looks in each given text
.I file
for
.I \%terminfo
entries and,
for each one found,
writes an analogous
.I \%termcap
description to the standard output stream.
.I \%terminfo
.RB \*(`` use \*(''
capabilities translate to
.I \%termcap
.B tc
capabilities.
Because
.I \%termcap
is a less expressive format than
.IR \%terminfo ,
some capabilities cannot be translated.
.PP
This utility is implemented as a link to \fB\%@TIC@\fP(1M),
with the latter's
.B \-C
option implied.
You can use other
.B \%@TIC@
options such as
.BR \-1 ,
.BR \-f ,
.BR \-v ,
.BR \-w ,
and
.BR \-x .
The
.B \-V
option reports the version of
.I \%ncurses
associated with this program and exits with a successful status.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I @TERMINFO@
compiled terminal description database
.SH EXTENSIONS
This command is an
.I \%ncurses
extension.
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 7 (2009) does not specify this command.
SVr4 and NetBSD
.I curses
do not implement it.
.SH AUTHORS
Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>
and
.br
Thomas E. Dickey <dickey@invisible\-island.net>
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%@INFOCMP@\fP(1M),
\fB\%@TIC@\fP(1M),
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%terminfo\fP(5)
