.\" Copyright (c) 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016 pkgconf authors (see AUTHORS).
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" This software is provided 'as is' and without any warranty, express or
.\" implied.  In no event shall the authors be liable for any damages arising
.\" from the use of this software.
.Dd November 15, 2016
.Dt PKGCONF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgconf
.Nd a system for configuring build dependency information
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar options
.Op Ar list of modules
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a program which helps to configure compiler and linker flags for
development libraries.
This allows build systems to detect other dependencies and use them with the
system toolchain.
.Sh GENERAL OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -version
Display the supported pkg-config version and exit.
.It Fl -atleast-pkgconfig-version Ns = Ns Ar VERSION
Exit with error if we do not support the requested pkg-config version.
.It Fl -errors-to-stdout
Print all errors on the main output stream instead of the error output stream.
.It Fl -silence-errors
Do not display any errors at all.
.It Fl -list-all
Walk all directories listed in the
.Va PKG_CONFIG_PATH
environmental variable and display information on packages which have registered
information there.
.It Fl -simulate
Simulates resolving a dependency graph based on the requested modules on the
command line.
Dumps a series of trees denoting pkgconf's resolver state.
.It Fl -no-cache
Skip caching packages when they are loaded into the internal resolver.
This may result in an alternate dependency graph being computed.
.It Fl -ignore-conflicts
Ignore
.Sq Conflicts
rules in modules.
.It Fl -env-only
Learn about pkgconf's configuration strictly from environmental variables.
.It Fl -validate Ar package ...
Validate specific
.Sq .pc
files for correctness.
.It Fl -maximum-traverse-depth Ns = Ns Ar DEPTH
Impose a limit on the allowed depth in the dependency graph.
For example, a depth of 2 will restrict the resolver from acting on child
dependencies of modules added to the resolver's solution.
.It Fl -static
Compute a deeper dependency graph and use compiler/linker flags intended for
static linking.
.It Fl -shared
Compute a simple dependency graph that is only suitable for shared linking.
.It Fl -pure
Treats the computed dependency graph as if it were pure.
This is mainly intended for use with the
.Fl -static
flag.
.It Fl -no-provides
Ignore
.Sq Provides
rules in modules when resolving dependencies.
.It Fl -with-path Ns = Ns Ar PATH
Adds a new module search path to pkgconf's dependency resolver.
Paths added in this way are given preference before other paths.
.It Fl -define-prefix
Attempts to determine the prefix variable to use for CFLAGS and LIBS entry relocations.
This is mainly useful for platforms where framework SDKs are relocatable, such as Windows.
.It Fl -dont-define-prefix
Disables the
.Sq define-prefix
feature.
.It Fl -prefix-variable Ns = Ns Ar VARIABLE
Sets the
.Sq prefix
variable used by the
.Sq define-prefix
feature.
.It Fl -relocate Ns = Ns Ar PATH
Relocates a path using the pkgconf_path_relocate API.
This is mainly used by the testsuite to provide a guaranteed interface
to the system's path relocation backend.
.It Fl -dont-relocate-paths
Disables the path relocation feature.
.El
.Sh MODULE-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -atleast-version Ns = Ns Ar VERSION
Exit with error if a module's version is less than the specified version.
.It Fl -exact-version Ns = Ns Ar VERSION
Exit with error if a module's version is not exactly the specified version.
.It Fl -max-version Ns = Ns Ar VERSION
Exit with error if a module's version is greater than the specified version.
.It Fl -exists
Exit with a non-zero result if the dependency resolver was unable to find all of
the requested modules.
.It Fl -uninstalled
Exit with a non-zero result if the dependency resolver uses an
.Sq uninstalled
module as part of its solution.
.It Fl -no-uninstalled
Forbids the dependency resolver from considering 'uninstalled' modules as part
of a solution.
.El
.Sh QUERY-SPECIFIC OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl -cflags , Fl -cflags-only-I , Fl -cflags-only-other
Display either all CFLAGS, only
.Fl I
CFLAGS or only CFLAGS that are not
.Fl I .
.It Fl -libs , Fl -libs-only-L , Fl -libs-only-l , Fl -libs-only-other
Display either all linker flags, only
.Fl L
linker flags, only
.Fl l
linker flags or only linker flags that are not
.Fl L
or
.Fl l .
.It Fl -keep-system-cflags , Fl -keep-system-libs
Keep CFLAGS or linker flag fragments that would be filtered due to being
included by default in the compiler.
.It Fl -define-variable Ns = Ns Ar VARNAME Ns = Ns Ar VALUE
Define
.Va VARNAME
as
.Va VALUE .
Variables are used in query output, and some modules' results may change based
on the presence of a variable definition.
.It Fl -print-variables
Print all seen variables for a module to the output channel.
.It Fl -print-provides
Print all relevant
.Sq Provides
entries for a module to the output channel.
.It Fl -variable Ns = Ns Ar VARNAME
Print the value of
.Va VARNAME .
.It Fl -print-requires , Fl -print-requires-private
Print the modules included in either the
.Va Requires
field or the
.Va Requires.private
field.
.It Fl -digraph
Dump the dependency resolver's solution as a graphviz
.Sq dot
file.
This can be used with graphviz to visualize module interdependencies.
.It Fl -path
Display the filenames of the
.Sq .pc
files used by the dependency resolver for a given dependency set.
.It Fl -env Ns = Ns Ar VARNAME
Print the requested values as variable declarations in a similar format as the
.Xr env 1
command.
.It Fl -fragment-filter Ns = Ns Ar TYPES
Filter the fragment lists for the specified types.
.It Fl -modversion
Print the version of the queried module.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_PATH
List of secondary directories where
.Sq .pc
files are looked up.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_LIBDIR
List of primary directories where
.Sq .pc
files are looked up.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_SYSROOT_DIR
.Sq sysroot
directory, will be prepended to every path defined in
.Va PKG_CONFIG_PATH .
Useful for cross compilation.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_TOP_BUILD_DIR
Provides an alternative setting for the
.Sq pc_top_builddir
global variable.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_PURE_DEPGRAPH
If set, enables the same behaviour as the
.Fl -pure
flag.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_SYSTEM_INCLUDE_PATH
List of paths that are considered system include paths by the toolchain.
This is a pkgconf-specific extension.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_SYSTEM_LIBRARY_PATH
List of paths that are considered system library paths by the toolchain.
This is a pkgconf-specific extension.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_DISABLE_UNINSTALLED
If set, enables the same behaviour as the
.Fl -no-uninstalled
flag.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_LOG
.Sq logfile
which is used for dumping audit information concerning installed module versions.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_DEBUG_SPEW
If set, enables additional debug logging.
The format of the debug log messages is implementation-specific.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_DONT_RELOCATE_PATHS
If set, disables the path relocation feature.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_MSVC_SYNTAX
If set, uses MSVC syntax for fragments.
.It Va PKG_CONFIG_FDO_SYSROOT_RULES
If set, follow the sysroot prefixing rules that freedesktop.org pkg-config uses.
.It Va DESTDIR
If set to PKG_CONFIG_SYSROOT_DIR, assume that PKG_CONFIG_FDO_SYSROOT_RULES is set.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Displaying the CFLAGS of a package:
.Dl $ pkgconf --cflags foo
.Dl -fPIC -I/usr/include/foo
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pc 5 ,
.Xr pkg.m4 7
