.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2010,2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" Author: Thomas E. Dickey 1996
.\"
.\" $Id: wresize.3x,v 1.47 2025/01/19 00:51:54 tom Exp $
.TH wresize 3X 2025-01-18 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.SH NAME
\fB\%wresize\fP \-
resize a \fIcurses\fR window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint wresize(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, int \fIlines\fP, int \fIcolumns\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR \%wresize ","
an
.I \%ncurses
extension to the
.I curses
library,
reallocates storage for
.IR win ,
adjusting its dimensions to
.I lines
and
.IR columns "."
If either dimension is larger than its current value,
.I \%ncurses
fills the expanded part of the window
with the window's background character as configured by
\fB\%wbkgdset\fP(3X)
(wide-character API: \fB\%wbkgrndset\fP(3X)).
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B \%wresize
returns
.B OK
on success and
.B ERR
on failure.
It fails if either
.I lines
or
.I columns
is less than or equal to zero,
or if an error occurs while (re)allocating memory for
.IR win "."
.SH NOTES
The only restriction placed on the values of
.I lines
and
.I columns
is that they be greater than zero.
They are
.I not
compared to the dimensions of the
.I curses
screen;
this keeps the logic of \fB\%resizeterm\fP(3X) simple.
The caller must ensure that
.IR win 's
dimensions fit within those of the screen.
.SH EXTENSIONS
.B \%wresize
is an \fB\%ncurses\fP(3X) extension,
and is not found in SVr4
.IR curses ","
4.4BSD
.IR curses ","
or any other previous
.I curses
implementation.
.SH PORTABILITY
Applications employing
.I \%ncurses
extensions should condition their use on the visibility of the
.B \%NCURSES_VERSION
preprocessor macro.
.PP
NetBSD
.I curses
adopted
.I \%wresize
in 2001 (release 1.5.3),
and
.I \%PDCurses
in 2004 (version 2.7).
.PP
It is not possible to resize windows with SVr4
.IR curses "."
.SH HISTORY
Thomas Dickey developed
.I \%wresize
as an extension to BSD
.I curses
in 1988,
and brought it to
.I \%ncurses
in mid-1995.
.SH AUTHORS
Thomas Dickey
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%resizeterm\fP(3X)
