.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025 Mateusz Piotrowski <0mp@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.Dd October 28, 2025
.Dt D 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm D
.Nd DTrace scripting language overview
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Sm off
.Ar provider Cm \&:
.Ar module Cm \&:
.Ar function Cm \&:
.Ar name
.Sm on
.Sm off
.Oo
.Oo
.Cm /
.Ar predicate
.Cm /
.Sm on
.Oc
.Cm \&{ Ns Ar action Ns Cm \&}
.Oc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm D
is the
.Xr dtrace 1
scripting language.
This manual provides a brief reference of the
.Nm
language and scripting.
.Pp
This manual page serves as a short reference of the language.
Refer to books listed in
.Sx SEE ALSO
for a complete reference.
.Sh PROBE'S DESCRIPTION
A probe's description consists of four elements:
.Sm off
.D1 Ar provider Ns Cm \&: Ns Ar module Cm \&: Ar function Cm \&: Ar name
.Sm on
.Pp
The exact meaning of
.Ar module ,
.Ar function ,
and
.Ar name
depends on
.Ar provider .
.Sh USER-DEFINED VARIABLE TYPES
.Bl -column "thread-local" "Syntax"
.It Sy Type Ta Sy Syntax
.It global       Ta Va variable_name
.It aggregate    Ta Sy @ Ns Va variable_name
.It thread-local Ta Sy self-> Ns Va variable_name
.It clause-local Ta Sy this-> Ns Va variable_name
.El
.Pp
.Em Tips :
.Bl -dash -compact
.It
Always use the variable type with the smallest scope
to minimize processing overhead.
.It
Use aggregate variables instead of global variables when possible.
Aggregate variables are multi-CPU safe in contrast to global variables.
.El
.Sh BUILT-IN VARIABLES
.Ss Probe Arguments
.Bl -tag -width "arg0, ..., arg9"
.It Va args[]
The array of typed probe arguments.
.It Va arg0 , ... , arg9
The untyped probe arguments represented as 64-bit unsigned integers.
Only the first ten arguments are available this way.
.El
.Ss Probe Information
.Bl -tag -width probeprov
.It Va epid
The enabled probe ID which uniquely identifies an enabled probe.
An enabled probe is defined by its probe ID, its predicates, and its actions.
.It Va id
The probe ID which uniquely identifies a probe available to DTrace.
.It Va probeprov
The
.Ar provider
in the probe's description
.Sm off
.Pq Ar provider Cm \&: Ar module Cm \&: Ar function Cm \&: Ar name
.Sm on .
.It Va probemod
The
.Ar module
in the probe's description
.Sm off
.Pq Ar provider Cm \&: Ar module Cm \&: Ar function Cm \&: Ar name
.Sm on .
.It Va probefunc
The
.Ar function
in the probe's description
.Sm off
.Pq Ar provider Cm \&: Ar module Cm \&: Ar function Cm \&: Ar name
.Sm on .
.It Va probename
The
.Ar name
in the probe's description
.Sm off
.Pq Ar provider Cm \&: Ar module Cm \&: Ar function Cm \&: Ar name
.Sm on .
.El
.Ss Process Information
.Bl -tag -width execname
.It Va execargs
The process arguments.
Effectively,
.Ql curthread->td_proc->p_args .
.It Va execname
The name of the current process.
Effectively,
.Ql curthread->td_proc->p_comm .
.It Va gid
The group ID of the current process.
.It Va pid
The process ID of the current process.
.It Va ppid
The parent process ID of the current process.
.It Va uid
The user ID of the current process.
.El
.Ss Thread Information
.Bl -tag -width curlwpsinfo
.It Va uregs[]
The saved user-mode register values.
.It Va cpu
The ID of the current CPU.
.It Va stackdepth
The kernel stack frame depth.
.It Va ustackdepth
The userspace counterpart of
.Va stackdepth .
.It Va tid
The thread ID.
Depending on the context,
this can be either the ID of a kernel thread or a thread in a user process.
.It Va errno
The
.Xr errno 2
value of the last system call performed by the current thread.
.It Va curlwpsinfo
A pointer to the
.Vt lwpsinfo_t
representation of the current thread.
Refer to
.Xr dtrace_proc 4
for more details.
.It Va curpsinfo
A pointer to the
.Vt psinfo_t
representation of the current process.
Refer to
.Xr dtrace_proc 4
for more details.
.It Va curthread
A pointer to the thread struct that is currently on-CPU.
E.g.,
.Ql curthread->td_name
returns the thread name.
The
.In sys/proc.h
header documents all members of
.Vt struct thread .
.It Va caller
The address of the kernel thread instruction at the time of execution
of the current probe.
.It Va ucaller
The userspace counterpart of
.Va caller .
.El
.Ss Timestamps
.Bl -tag -width walltimestamp
.It Va timestamp
The number of nanoseconds since boot.
Suitable for calculating relative time differences of elapsed time and latency.
.It Va vtimestamp
The number of nanoseconds that the current thread spent on CPU.
The counter is not increased during handling of a fired DTrace probe.
Suitable for calculating relative time differences of on-CPU time.
.It Va walltimestamp
The number of nanoseconds since the Epoch
.Pq 1970-01-01T00+00:00 .
Suitable for timestamping logs.
.El
.Sh BUILT-IN FUNCTIONS
.\" Keep the indentation wide enough for the reader to be able to skim through
.\" function names quickly.
.Bl -tag -width "size_t strlen"
.It Ft string Fn strchr "string s" "char c"
Return a substring of
.Fa s
starting at the first occurance of
.Fa c
in
.Fa s .
Return
.Dv NULL
if
.Fa c
does not occur in
.Fa s .
.Pp
For example,
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
strchr("abc", 'b');
.Ed
returns
.Ql "bc"
and
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
strchr("abc", 'd');
.Ed
returns
.Dv NULL .
.It Ft string Fn strjoin "string s1" "string s2"
Return a string resulting from concatenating
.Fa s1
and
.Fa s2 .
.Pp
For example,
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
strjoin("abc", "def")
.Ed
returns
.Ql abcdef .
.It Ft string Fn strrchr "string s" "char c"
Return a substring of
.Fa s
starting at the last occurance of
.Fa c
in
.Fa s .
Similar to
.Fn strchr .
.It Ft string Fn strstr "string haystack" "string needle"
Return a substring of
.Fa haystack
starting at the first occurrence of
.Fa needle .
Return
.Dv NULL
if
.Fa needle
is not a substring of
.Fa haystack .
.Pp
For example,
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
strstr("abc1bc2", "bc")
.Ed
returns
.Ql bc1bc2
and
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
strstr("abc", "xy")
.Ed
returns
.Dv NULL .
.It Ft string Fn strtok "string s" "string separators"
Tokenize
.Fa s
with
.Fa separators .
.Pp
For example,
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
strtok("abcdefg", "xyzd")
.Ed
returns
.Ql abc .
.It Ft size_t Fn strlen "string s"
Return the length of string
.Fa s .
.It Ft string Fn substr "string s" "int position" "[int length]"
Return a
substring of string
.Fa s
starting at
.Fa position .
The substring will be at most
.Fa length Ns -long .
If
.Fa length
is not specified, use the rest of the string.
If
.Fa position
is greater than
the size of
.Fa s ,
return an empty string.
.Pp
For example,
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
substr("abcd", 2)
.Ed
returns
.Ql cd ,
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
substr("abcd", 2, 1)
.Ed
returns
.Ql c ,
and
.Bd -literal -compact -offset indent
substr("abcd", 99)
.Ed
returns an empty string.
.El
.Ss Aggregation Functions
.Bl -tag -compact -width "llquantize(value, factor, low, high, nsteps)"
.It Fn avg value
Average
.It Fn count
Count
.It Fn llquantize value factor low high nsteps
Log-linear quantization
.It Fn lquantize value low high nsteps
Linear quantization
.It Fn max value
Maximum
.It Fn min value
Minimum
.It Fn quantize value
Power-of-two frequency distribution
.It Fn stddev value
Standard deviation
.It Fn sum value
Sum
.El
.Ss Kernel Destructive Functions
By default,
.Xr dtrace 1
does not permit the use of destructive actions.
.Bl -tag -width "chill(nanoseconds)"
.It Fn breakpoint
Set a kernel breakpoint and transfer control to
the
.Xr ddb 4
kernel debugger.
.It Fn chill nanoseconds
Spin on the CPU for the specified number of
.Fa nanoseconds .
.It Fn panic
Panic the kernel.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/dtrace
.It Pa /usr/share/dtrace
DTrace scripts shipped with
.Fx
base.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr awk 1 ,
.Xr dtrace 1 ,
.Xr tracing 7
.Rs
.%B The illumos Dynamic Tracing Guide
.%D 2008
.%U https://illumos.org/books/dtrace/
.Re
.Rs
.%A Brendan Gregg
.%A Jim Mauro
.%B DTrace: Dynamic Tracing in Oracle Solaris, Mac OS X and FreeBSD
.%I Prentice Hall
.%D 2011
.%U https://www.brendangregg.com/dtracebook/
.Re
.Rs
.%A George Neville-Neil
.%A Jonathan Anderson
.%A Graeme Jenkinson
.%A Brian Kidney
.%A Domagoj Stolfa
.%A Arun Thomas
.%A Robert N. M. Watson
.%C Cambridge, United Kingdom
.%D August 2018
.%T Univeristy of Cambridge Computer Laboratory
.%R OpenDTrace Specification version 1.0
.%U https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/techreports/UCAM-CL-TR-924.pdf
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
This manual page first appeared in
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Mateusz Piotrowski Aq Mt 0mp@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Va cwd
variable which typically provides the current working directory is
not supported on
.Fx
at the moment.
