.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1990 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)environ.7	6.6 (Berkeley) 7/19/91
.\"
.Dd July 19, 1991
.Dt ENVIRON 7
.Os BSD 4.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm environ
.Nd user environment
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Ar extern char **environ ;
.Sh DESCRIPTION
An array of strings called the
.Ar environment
is made available by
.Xr execve  2
when a process begins.  By convention these strings have the form
.Dq Ar name=value .
The following names are used by various commands:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Ev EXINIT
A startup list of commands read by
.Xr ex  1  ,
.Xr edit  1 ,
and
.Xr vi  1  .
.It Ev HOME
A user's login directory, set by
.Xr login  1
from the password file
.Xr passwd  5  .
.It Ev PATH
The sequence of directories, separated by colons, searched by
.Xr csh  1  ,
.Xr sh  1 ,
.Xr system  3  ,
.Xr execvp  3 ,
etc, when looking for an executable file.
PATH is set to ``:/usr/ucb:/bin:/usr/bin'' initially by
.Xr login  1  .
.It Ev PRINTER
The name of the default printer to be used by
.Xr lpr  1  ,
.Xr lpq  1 ,
and
.Xr lprm  1  .
.It Ev SHELL
The full pathname of the user's login shell.
.It Ev TERM
The kind of terminal for which output is to be prepared.
This information is used by commands, such as
.Xr nroff  1
or
.Xr plot 1
which may exploit special terminal capabilities.  See
.Pa /usr/share/misc/termcap
.Pq Xr termcap 5
for a list of terminal types.
.It Ev TERMCAP
The string describing the terminal in TERM, or, if
it begins with a '/', the name of the termcap file.
See
.Ev TERMPATH
below,
.Xr termcap  5  ,
and
.Xr termcap  .
.It Ev TERMPATH
A sequence of pathnames of termcap files, separated by colons or spaces,
which are searched for terminal descriptions in the order listed.  Having
no
.Ev TERMPATH
is equivalent to a
.Ev TERMPATH
of
.Dq Pa $HOME/.termcap:/etc/termcap .
.Ev TERMPATH
is ignored if
.Ev TERMCAP
contains a full pathname.
.It Ev USER
The login name of the user.
.El
.Pp
Further names may be placed in the environment by the
.Xr export
command and
.Ar name=value
arguments in
.Xr sh  1  ,
or by the
.Xr setenv
command if you use
.Xr csh  1  .
It is unwise to change certain
.Xr sh  1
variables that are frequently exported by
.Pa .profile
files, such as
.Ev MAIL ,
.Ev PS1 ,
.Ev PS2 ,
and
.Ev IFS ,
unless you know what you are doing.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr csh 1 ,
.Xr ex 1 ,
.Xr login 1 ,
.Xr sh 1 ,
.Xr execve 2 ,
.Xr execle 3 ,
.Xr system 3 ,
.Xr termcap 3 ,
.Xr termcap 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm environ
manual page appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
