.\" Copyright 2014 John-Mark Gurney
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 22, 2022
.Dt GROWFS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm growfs ,
.Nm growfs_fstab
.Nd start up scripts to grow the root file system and add swap
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
script normally runs at the first boot after system installation.
If the boot disk is larger than the root file system and boot partitions,
and the root file system is in the last partition,
.Nm
can expand the root file system.
It can also add a swap partition, with a default size of 10% of the boot disk.
Swap is limited to twice the memory size up to 4 GB,
8 GB up to 8 GB of memory, and memory size over 8 GB.
It is also limited to the
.Xr sysctl 8
value of
.Li vm.swap_maxpages
divided by 2.
By default, no swap partition is created if an existing swap partition is found
or is listed in
.Pa /etc/fstab ,
or the disk is under 15 GB.
The
.Nm growfs_fstab
script adds any new swap partition to
.Pa /etc/fstab
after the root file system is made writable,
and enables its use as a dump partition if the
.Va dumpdev
variable from
.Xr rc.conf 5
is set to
.Li AUTO .
.Pp
The following options in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
control the behavior of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width ".Va growfs_swap_size" -offset indent
.It Va growfs_enable
.Pq Dq Li NO
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the first time the machine boots, the root file system will be automatically
expanded, if possible, to fill up all available space after it,
after optionally adding a swap device at the end.
.It Va growfs_swap_size
.Pq Dq Li \&
If set to
.Dq Li 0 ,
the addition of a swap partition is disabled.
An empty value
.Pq Dq Li \&
allows the creation of a swap partition with the default size.
If set to another value,
the swap partition will be created with the specified size in bytes,
even if another swap partition is detected.
.El
.Pp
A setting for
.Va growfs_swap_size
can be set in the kernel environment, in which case it overrides
the value from
.Pa /etc/rc.conf .
.Pp
To expand the root file system without rebooting, run the following command:
.Dl % /etc/rc.d/growfs onestart
In addition, if a swap partition is added, run the command:
.Dl % /etc/rc.d/growfs_fstab onestart
Note that if a disk is expanded again,
and if the root file system had previously been expanded
and a swap partition added, it is necessary to delete the swap
partition before this procedure
in order to expand the root file system to the new size.
A new swap partition can be created during the expansion.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
.Nm
script only attempts to expand the root file system,
and free space must be available immediately after the root partition.
It is normally used on images that have a single file system.
The script requires that
.Xr awk 1
be present and in the path.
This usually means that
.Pa /usr
must be available prior to running the script.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact -width Pa
.It Pa /etc/fstab
.It Pa /etc/rc.conf
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fstab 5 ,
.Xr rc.conf 5 ,
.Xr growfs 8 ,
.Xr zpool 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 10.1 .
The ability to add a swap partition was added in
.Fx 14.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The man page and script were written by
.An John-Mark Gurney Aq Mt jmg@FreeBSD.org .
The ability to create a swap partition was added by
.An Michael Karels Aq Mt karels@FreeBSD.org .
