.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Capabilities Limited
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" This software was developed by Capabilities Limited with funding from
.\" Innovate UK and the Department for Science, Innovation and Technology
.\" for the adoption and diffusion of CHERI technology under project
.\" 10168042 (“CheriBSD feature extraction, maturity, and testing”).
.\"
.Dd June 26, 2026
.Dt MEMORY_MODEL 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm memory model
.Nd Overview of the memory model
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Description of the memory model implemented by
.Fx .
.Ss Introduction
This document covers various aspects of the memory model implemented by
.Fx Ns 's
supported architectures, compilers, and language runtimes.
Some aspects are currently documented elsewhere, particularly in
.Xr atomic 9 .
.Ss Pointer Provenance
On the surface, pointers are integer addresses within a (usually
virtual) address space.
In systems programming languages, pointers also have provenance which
indicates where and when the pointer can access memory.
Compilers use provenance information to perform alias analysis to
justify optimizations.
.Pp
On CHERI targets, the bounds, permissions, and validity tag of
capabilities make some aspects of provenance concrete.
CHERI capabilities may only be derived from other capabilities and are
subject to monotonicity guarantees.
Specifically, no manipulation of a CHERI capability can produce a
capability with more permissions than the original.
.Pp
Developers must take care to ensure that pointer provenance is not lost
unless intended.
Specifically:
.Bl -dash
.It
When copying or manipulating pointers, use pointer types
.Pq e.g., Vt char * ,
.Vt intptr_t ,
or
.Vt uintptr_t
to preserve provenance.
Other integer types do not preserve provenance.
.It
Ensure that expressions using
.Vt intptr_t
or
.Vt uintptr_t
have a single, clear source of provenance.
E.g., when adding two variables of type
.Vt intptr_t
cast the one that is an offset to
.Vt size_t .
.It
Ensure that pointers are stored at their natural alignment.
This is required by CHERI, and accessing an object through an improperly
aligned pointer is undefined behavior in C.
.It
Cast pointers to a provenance-free type such as
.Vt ptraddr_t
when the address of a pointer is desired without provenance.
.It
Avoid manipulating pointer addresses such that they fall outside of the
underlying allocation except one past the end as permitted by ISO C.
Taking pointers further out of bounds
.Pq even temporarily
is undefined behavior in the C standard.
In practice CHERI capabilities may be taken some distance out of bounds,
but if taken too far out of bounds, the validity tag will be stripped.
.El
.Pp
Developers must also take care not to leak valid pointers across address
space boundaries.
Specifically:
.Bl -dash
.It
Copy objects containing pointers with provenance-preserving APIs such
as:
.Xr copyinptr 9 ,
.Xr copyoutptr 9 ,
.Xr memcpy 3 ,
and
.Xr memmove 3 .
.It
Copy objects that should not contain pointers using
non-provenance-preserving APIs such as:
.Xr copyin 9 ,
.Xr copyout 9 ,
.Xr memcpy_data 9 ,
and
.Xr memmove_data 9 .
.El
.Pp
For practical advice on adapting to CHERI C/C++'s notion of provenance, see the
.Lk https://ctsrd-cheri.github.io/cheri-c-programming/ CHERI C/C++ Programming Guide .
A provenance-aware memory object model of C is documented in
ISO/IEC TS 6010:2025:
.Dq Programming languages – A Provenance-aware memory object model for C
which can be read in draft form as WG14 paper
.Lk https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n3057.pdf N3057 .
Further background on provenance in systems programming languages can
be found in the Rust RFC
.Lk https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3559-rust-has-provenance.html 3559-rust-has-provenance .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arch 7 ,
.Xr atomic 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This software and this manual page were developed by Capabilities
Limited with funding from Innovate UK and the Department for Science,
Innovation and Technology for the adoption and diffusion of CHERI
technology under project 10168042
.Pq Do CheriBSD feature extraction, maturity, and testing Dc .
