.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Murray Stokely <murray@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 17, 2005
.Dt RELEASE 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm release
.Nd "release building infrastructure"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fx
provides a complete build environment suitable for users to make
full releases of the
.Fx
operating system.
All of the tools necessary to build a release are available from the
CVS repository in
.Pa src/release .
A complete release can actually be built with only a single command,
including the creation of ISO images suitable for burning to CD-ROM,
installation floppies, and an FTP install directory.
This command is aptly named
.Dq Li "make release" .
.Pp
Before attempting to build a release, the user is expected to be
familiar with the contents of
.Xr build 7 ,
and should have experience upgrading systems from source.
The release build process requires that
.Pa /usr/obj
be populated with the output of
a native
.Dq Li "make buildworld"
compiled from sources matching the currently running kernel.
This is necessary so that the object files for a complete system can
be installed into a clean
.Xr chroot 8
environment.
The release procedure also requires that the
.Xr md 4
(memory disk) device driver be present in the kernel
(either by being compiled in or available as a module).
.Pp
This document does not cover source code management, quality
assurance, or other aspects of the release engineering process.
.Sh TARGETS
The release makefile
.Pq Pa src/release/Makefile
is fairly abstruse.
Most developers will only be concerned with the
.Cm release
target.
.\" XXX: Some sort of introduction to this list?  All the others have one.
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm package-split"
.It Cm release
Uses
.Dq Li "make installworld"
to install a clean system into a
.Xr chroot 8
environment on the file system.
Checks out the specified version of the source code and then rebuilds
the entire system in the clean environment with
.Dq Li "make buildworld" .
The detailed steps that follow are then executed to package up the
different distributions, build the installation floppy disks, build
release documentation, and so on.
.Pp
This target must be built as root with the
.Va kern.securelevel
sysctl set to \-1 (the default).
.It Cm rerelease
Assumes that the output of a release build has been manually modified,
and performs the minimal number of steps to rebuild the release using
the intermediate output of the previous
.Dq Li "make release" .
.It Cm floppies
Generate a new set of boot and fixit floppies.
This will call the
.Cm release.4 ,
.Cm release.8 ,
.Cm floppies.1 ,
.Cm floppies.2 ,
and
.Cm floppies.3
targets to re-generate the floppy images of a previous
.Dq Li "make release" .
This is most often used to build custom boot floppies.
.It Cm package-split
Generates the portions of the disc 1 and disc 2 images related to packages.
It uses the list of desired packages from the
.Pa src/release/scripts/package-split.py
script to pull packages out of a package build provided by the ports team
and organize them appropriately.
The resulting directory can then be passed to
.Dq Li "make release"
via the
.Va CD_PACKAGE_TREE
variable to populate the ISO images built by the
.Cm iso.1
target with the correct package related bits.
.El
.Pp
Targets called by
.Dq Li "make release" :
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm fetch-distfiles"
.It Cm release.1
Cleans out the
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/R
directory and uses
.Xr mtree 8
to build the directory hierarchy for the system.
.It Cm release.2
Installs the system into the distribution directories.
.It Cm release.3
Makes and installs the
.Pa GENERIC
kernel as well as any other kernels listed in
.Va KERNELS .
.It Cm release.4
Uses
.Xr crunchgen 1
to build
.Dq crunched
binaries to live on the installation floppies.
.It Cm release.5
Builds synthetic distributions, and cleans up the previously built
distribution trees.
.It Cm release.6
Creates tarballs of the assembled distribution trees.
.It Cm release.7
Makes source distributions.
.It Cm release.8
Creates the MFS root file systems.
.It Cm floppies.1
Creates the boot and kernel floppies.
.It Cm floppies.2
Creates the fixit floppy.
.It Cm floppies.3
Finalizes the
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/R/ftp/stage/floppies
staging directory.
.It Cm ftp.1
Sets up a suitable area for FTP installations in
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/R/ftp .
.It Cm cdrom.1
Create the layout for the live file system CD-ROM image in
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/R/cdrom .
.It Cm cdrom.2
Create the layout for the first and second CD-ROM images.
.It Cm cdrom.3
Create the layout for the boot-only CD-ROM image and the boot-only UFS
miniroot image.
.It Cm iso.1
Builds ISO images (installation and
.Dq live
file system) from the CD-ROM release area
(disabled by default, see
.Va MAKE_ISOS
below).
.It Cm fetch-distfiles
Fetches distfiles needed during the release build that are not already in
.Va RELEASEDISTFILES .
.It Cm doc.1
Builds all of the necessary tools to turn the
.Fx
Documentation Project source documents (SGML, XML) into HTML
and text documents that will accompany the release.
Also, builds and installs the actual user documentation.
This includes the Handbook, FAQ, articles, and so on.
.It Cm doc.2
Builds the release documentation.
This includes the release notes,
hardware guide, and installation instructions.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
Variables that must be specified:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va BUILDNAME"
.It Va BUILDNAME
The name of the release to be built.
This is used to set the
.Va RELEASE
value in
.Pa sys/conf/newvers.sh ,
which affects the output of
.Xr uname 1 .
.It Va CHROOTDIR
The directory to be used as the
.Xr chroot 8
environment for the entire release build.
.\" XXX: I recommend against hardcoding specific numbers like "2.3" here;
.\" XXX: perhaps it should be replaced with something to the effect of
.\" XXX: "we do not know how much space you'll need, but make sure you have
.\" XXX: at least 3 GB to be safe" (I know i'm still hardcoding a number,
.\" XXX: but at least it looks less like a decree and more like an estimate.
This file system should have at least 3.2 gigabytes of free space on the
i386 architecture.
.It Va CVSROOT
The location of the
.Fx
CVS repository.
This path name is in reference to the real system root,
.Em not
the root of the
.Xr chroot 8
directory tree.
.El
.Pp
Optional variables:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va NO_PREFETCHDISTFILES"
.It Va CD_PACKAGE_TREE
A directory containing extra bits for the first and second CD-ROM images.
The extra files for the first disc should be in
.Pa ${CD_PACKAGE_TREE}/disc1
and the extra files for the second disc should be in
.Pa ${CD_PACKAGE_TREE}/disc2 .
Typically, this variable will be set to the output directory of an earlier
invocation of the
.Cm package-split
target.
.It Va CVSARGS
Additional arguments for
.Xr cvs 1
that come before the subcommands such as
.Dq Li "-qR" .
.It Va CVSCMDARGS
Additional arguments for
.Xr cvs 1
.Ic checkout
and
.Ic update
commands.
For example, setting this variable to
.Dq Li "-D '01/01/2002 00:00:00 GMT'"
for
.Dq Li "make release"
or
.Dq Li "make rerelease"
will ask
.Xr cvs 1
to check out or update sources as of 00:00:00 GMT, January 1 2002, respectively.
.It Va DOC_LANG
The list of languages and encodings the SGML-based documentation
should be built for.
If not set, the documentation is built for all available languages.
.It Va DOCRELEASETAG
The CVS tag to use when checking out the documentation tree.
Usually,
the head of the documentation tree is used by default.
If
.Va RELEASETAG
specifies a release tag,
then the associated release version is used as the default instead.
.It Va EXTLOCALDIR
The directory that will be copied to
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/usr/local .
.It Va EXTSRCDIR
The directory specified by this variable will be copied into
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/usr/src
instead of that directory being populated by a CVS checkout.
For
.Dq Li "rerelease" ,
this will NOT be copied; cvs update will be used instead.
.It Va EXTDOCDIR
The directory specified by this variable will be copied into
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/usr/doc .
For
.Dq Li "rerelease" ,
this will NOT be copied; cvs update will be used instead.
.It Va EXTPORTSDIR
The directory specified by this variable will be copied into
.Pa ${CHROOTDIR}/usr/ports .
For
.Dq Li "rerelease" ,
this will do NOTHING.
.It Va KERNEL_FLAGS
The contents of this variable are passed to
.Xr make 1
when building kernels during the release build.
For example, setting this variable to
.Dq Li "-j 4"
will instruct
.Xr make 1
to execute up to four processes at a time.
.It Va KERNELS
Specifies a list of additional kernel configurations to compile and
install into the
.Dq base
distribution.
Each kernel is installed into
.Pa /boot/<config>
so that it can be booted from the loader via
.Dq Li "boot <config>" .
.It Va LOCAL_PATCHES
Patch files against
.Pa /usr/src
that will be applied in the
.Xr chroot 8
environment before the release build begins.
.It Va PATCH_FLAGS
Arguments for the
.Xr patch 1
command used to apply
.Va LOCAL_PATCHES
patch file.
.It Va LOCAL_SCRIPT
A script that will be run in the
.Xr chroot 8
environment immediately after any local patches are applied.
.It Va MAKE_ISOS
If defined, bootable ISO CD-ROM images will be created from the
contents of the CD-ROM stage directory.
.It Va NOCDROM
If defined, the CD-ROM stage directories will not be created.
.It Va NODOC
If defined, the SGML-based documentation from the
.Fx
Documentation Project will not be built.
However, the
.Dq doc
distribution will still be created with the minimal documentation set
provided in
.Pa src/share/doc .
.It Va NO_FLOPPIES
If defined, no boot and fixit floppy disk images will be created (for those
platforms supporting them).
.It Va NOPORTS
If defined, the Ports Collection will be omitted from the release.
.It Va PORTSRELEASETAG
The CVS tag to use when checking out the ports tree.
Usually,
the head of the ports tree is used by default.
If
.Va RELEASETAG
specifies a release tag,
then the associated release version is used as the default instead.
.It Va NO_PREFETCHDISTFILES
If this variable is defined,
then distfiles needed during the release build will not be downloaded prior to
entering the
.Xr chroot 8
environment.
Note that if
.Va NO_PREFETCHDISTFILES
is not set,
the fetching is done after any distfiles are obtained via
.Va RELEASEDISTFILES .
.It Va RELEASEDISTFILES
The directory where the distribution files for ports required by the
release build can be found.
This may save a significant amount of time over downloading the
distfiles through a slow link.
.It Va RELEASENOUPDATE
If this variable is defined for
.Dq Li "make rerelease" ,
the source code will not be updated with
.Dq Li "cvs update" .
.It Va RELEASETAG
The CVS tag corresponding to the release that is to be built.
If undefined, the release will be built from the
.Dv HEAD
of the CVS tree
(a
.Dq "-CURRENT snapshot" ) .
.It Va SEPARATE_LIVEFS
Store the live file system on its own CD-ROM image rather than placing it on
the first disc.
.It Va TARGET_ARCH
The target machine processor architecture.
This is analogous to the
.Dq Nm uname Fl p
output.
Set this to cross-build for a different architecture.
.It Va TARGET
The target hardware platform.
This is analogous to the
.Dq Nm uname Fl m
output.
This is necessary to cross-build some target architectures.
For example, cross-building for PC98 machines requires
.Va TARGET_ARCH Ns = Ns Li i386
and
.Va TARGET Ns = Ns Li pc98 .
.It Va WORLDDIR
The directory where
.Dq Li "make buildworld"
was run; defaults to
.Pa ${.CURDIR}/..
which usually points to
.Pa /usr/src .
.It Va WORLD_FLAGS
The contents of this variable are passed to
.Xr make 1
when building world during the release build.
For example, setting this variable to
.Dq Li "-j 4"
will instruct
.Xr make 1
to execute up to four processes at a time.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Pa /usr/doc/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/doc/share/mk/doc.project.mk
.It Pa /usr/ports/Mk/bsd.port.mk
.It Pa /usr/ports/Mk/bsd.sites.mk
.It Pa /usr/share/examples/etc/make.conf
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile.inc1
.It Pa /usr/src/release/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/release/${arch}/boot_crunch.conf
.It Pa /usr/src/release/${arch}/fixit_crunch.conf
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following sequence of commands was used to build the
.Fx 4.9
release:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd /usr
cvs co -rRELENG_4_9_0_RELEASE src
cd src
make buildworld
cd release
make release CHROOTDIR=/local3/release BUILDNAME=4.9-RELEASE \\
  CVSROOT=/host/cvs/usr/home/ncvs RELEASETAG=RELENG_4_9_0_RELEASE
.Ed
.Pp
After running these commands, a complete system suitable for FTP or
CD-ROM distribution is available in the
.Pa /local3/release/R
directory.
.Pp
The following sequence of commands can be used to build a
.Dq "-CURRENT snapshot"
of a
locally modified source tree:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd /usr/src
cvs diff -u > /path/to/local.patch
make buildworld
cd release
make release CHROOTDIR=/local3/release BUILDNAME=6.0-CURRENT \\
  CVSROOT=/host/cvs/usr/home/ncvs LOCAL_PATCHES=/path/to/local.patch
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cc 1 ,
.Xr crunchgen 1 ,
.Xr cvs 1 ,
.Xr install 1 ,
.Xr make 1 ,
.Xr patch 1 ,
.Xr uname 1 ,
.Xr md 4 ,
.Xr make.conf 5 ,
.Xr build 7 ,
.Xr ports 7 ,
.Xr chroot 8 ,
.Xr mtree 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Rs
.%T "FreeBSD Release Engineering"
.%O http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/articles/releng/
.Re
.Rs
.%T "FreeBSD Release Engineering of Third Party Packages"
.%O http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/articles/releng-packages/
.Re
.Rs
.%T "FreeBSD Developers' Handbook"
.%O http://www.FreeBSD.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/developers-handbook/
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
.Fx
1.x
used a manual checklist, compiled by
.An Rod Grimes ,
to produce a release.
Apart from being incomplete, the list put a lot of specific demands on
available file systems and was quite torturous to execute.
.Pp
As part of the
.Fx 2.0
release engineering effort, significant
effort was spent getting
.Pa src/release/Makefile
into a shape where it could at least automate most of the tediousness
of building a release in a sterile environment.
.Pp
With its almost 1000 revisions spread over multiple branches, the
.Xr cvs 1
log of
.Pa src/release/Makefile
contains a vivid historical record of some
of the hardships release engineers go through.
.Sh AUTHORS
.Pa src/release/Makefile
was originally written by
.An -nosplit
.An Rod Grimes ,
.An Jordan Hubbard ,
and
.An Poul-Henning Kamp .
This manual page was written by
.An Murray Stokely Aq murray@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
Infrastructure changes are occasionally made to the
.Fx
documentation set in such a way that release builds on security
branches can fail.
To work around this, release builds can be made to checkout the
documentation from the last fully supported release of
.Fx .
For example:
.Pp
.Dl "make release RELEASETAG=RELENG_4_9 DOCRELEASETAG=RELEASE_4_9_0 ..."
