.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"	$NetBSD: tests.kyua.7,v 1.2 2013/07/20 21:39:59 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND
.\" CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE
.\" GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR
.\" OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN
.\" IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 19, 2013
.Dt TESTS 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tests
.Nd introduction to the FreeBSD test suite
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fx
test suite provides a collection of automated tests for two major purposes.
On the one hand, the test suite aids
.Em developers
in catching bugs and regressions in the code when they performing modifications
to the source tree.
On the other hand, the test suite allows
.Em end users
(and, in particular, system administrators) to verify that fresh installations
of the
.Fx
operating system behave correctly in their hardware platform and also to ensure
that the system does not suffer from regressions during regular system
operation and maintenance.
.Pp
The
.Fx
test suite is installed under the
.Pa /usr/tests
hierarchy.
.Pp
This manual page describes how to execute the test suite and how to configure
some of its optional features.
.Ss When to run the tests?
Before diving into the details of how to run the test suite, here are some
scenarios in which you should be running them:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
After a fresh installation of
.Fx
to ensure that the system works correctly on your hardware platform.
.It
After an upgrade of
.Fx
to a different version to ensure that the new code works well on your
hardware platform and that the upgrade did not introduce regressions in your
configuration.
.It
After performing changes to the source tree to catch any bugs and/or regressions
introduced by the modifications.
.It
Periodically, maybe from a
.Xr cron 8
job, to ensure that any changes to the system (such as the installation of
third-party packages or manual modifications to configuration files) do not
introduce unexpected failures.
.El
.Ss Running the tests
First of all, you will need to install the
.Sq ports/devel/kyua
package.
.Pp
Use the following command to run the whole test suite:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua test -k /usr/tests/Kyuafile
.Ed
.Pp
The above will go through all test programs in
.Pa /usr/tests
recursively, execute them, store their results and debugging data in Kyua
database (by default in
.Pa ~/.kyua/store.db ) ,
and print a summary of the results.
This summary includes a brief count of all total tests run and how many of
them failed.
.Pp
It is possible to restrict which tests to run by providing their names in
the command line.
For example, this would execute the tests for the
.Xr cp 1
and
.Xr cut 1
utilities:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua test -k /usr/tests/Kyuafile bin/cp usr.bin/cut
.Ed
.Ss Obtaining reports of the tests execution
Additional information of the results of the execution can be later extracted
from the database by using the various reporting commands of Kyua.
For example, the following would extract a plain-text report of the executed
tests and show which ones failed:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua report
.Ed
.Pp
This other example would generate an HTML report ready to be published on a
web server:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ kyua report-html --output ~/public_html/tests
.Ed
.Pp
For further details on the command-line interface of Kyua, please refer
to its manual page
.Xr kyua 1 .
.\".Ss Configuring the tests
.\"Some test cases in the
.\".Fx
.\"test suite require the administrator to manually set up some configuration
.\"properties before they can run.
.\"Unless these properties are defined, the tests that require them will be marked
.\"as skipped and thus they will not be really executed.
.\".Pp
.\"Test suites are configured by defining the values to their configuration
.\"variables in
.\".Pa /usr/local/etc/kyua/kyua.conf .
.\"The format of this file is detailed in
.\".Xr kyua.conf 5 .
.\".Pp
.\"The following configuration variables are available in the
.\".Fx
.\"test suite:
.\".Bl -tag
.\".It NONE REGISTERED YET
.\"TBD.
.Ss What to do if something fails?
If there is
.Em any failure
during the execution of the test suite, please considering reporting it to the
.Fx
developers so that the failure can be analyzed and fixed.
To do so, either send a message to the appropriate mailing list or file a
problem report.
For more details please refer to:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
.Lk http://lists.freebsd.org/ "FreeBSD Mailing Lists"
.It
.Lk http://www.freebsd.org/send-pr.html "Submit a FreeBSD Problem Report"
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -compact -width usrXlocalXetcXkyuaXkyuaXconfXX
.It Pa /usr/local/etc/kyua/kyua.conf
System-wide configuration file for
.Xr kyua 1 .
.It Pa ~/.kyua/kyua.conf
User-specific configuration file for
.Xr kyua 1 ;
overrides the system file.
.It Pa ~/.kyua/store.db
Default database used by Kyua to maintain the data of the executed tests.
.It Pa /usr/tests/
Location of the
.Fx
test suite.
.It Pa /usr/tests/Kyuafile
Top-level test suite definition file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1 .
.Sh HISTORY
The collection of test programs in
.Pa /usr/tests
first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Pp
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Nx 6.0
and was later ported to
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Julio Merino Aq Mt jmmv@google.com
