.ig
Copyright (C) 1989-2000, 2001, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.TH GROG @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
grog \- guess options for groff command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grog
[
.BI \- option
\|.\|.\|.\&
]
[
.IR files\  \|.\|.\|.\&
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B grog
reads
.I files
and guesses which of the
.BR groff  (@MAN1EXT@)
options
.BR \-e ,
.BR \-man ,
.BR \-me ,
.BR \-mm ,
.BR \-mom ,
.BR \-ms ,
.BR \-mdoc,
.BR \-mdoc-old,
.BR \-p ,
.BR \-R ,
.BR \-g ,
.BR \-G ,
.BR \-s ,
and
.BR \-t
are required for printing
.IR files ,
and prints the groff command including those options on the standard output.
A filename of
.B \-
is taken to refer to the standard input.
If no files are specified the standard input will be read.
Any specified options will be included in the printed command.
No space is allowed between options and their arguments.
The only options recognized are
.B \-C
(which is also passed on) to enable compatibility mode, and
.B \-v
to print the version number.
.LP
For example,
.IP
.B \`grog \-Tdvi paper.ms\`
.LP
will guess the appropriate command to print
.B paper.ms
and then run it after adding the
.B \-Tdvi
option.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR doctype (1),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@refer (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@grn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR grap (1),
.BR @g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@)
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
