.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2007 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $P4$
.\"
.Dd December 21, 2007
.Dt PAM_CHAUTHTOK 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pam_chauthtok
.Nd perform password related functions within the PAM framework
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn pam_chauthtok "pam_handle_t *pamh" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
function attempts to change the authentication token
for the user associated with the pam context specified by the
.Fa pamh
argument.
.Pp
The
.Fa flags
argument is the binary or of zero or more of the following
values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Dv PAM_SILENT
Do not emit any messages.
.It Dv PAM_CHANGE_EXPIRED_AUTHTOK
Change only those authentication tokens that have expired.
.El
.Pp
If any other bits are set,
.Nm
will return
.Dv PAM_SYMBOL_ERR .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Nm
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_ABORT
General failure.
.It Bq Er PAM_AUTHTOK_DISABLE_AGING
Authentication token aging disabled.
.It Bq Er PAM_AUTHTOK_ERR
Authentication token failure.
.It Bq Er PAM_AUTHTOK_LOCK_BUSY
Authentication token lock busy.
.It Bq Er PAM_AUTHTOK_RECOVERY_ERR
Failed to recover old authentication token.
.It Bq Er PAM_BUF_ERR
Memory buffer error.
.It Bq Er PAM_CONV_ERR
Conversation failure.
.It Bq Er PAM_PERM_DENIED
Permission denied.
.It Bq Er PAM_SERVICE_ERR
Error in service module.
.It Bq Er PAM_SYMBOL_ERR
Invalid symbol.
.It Bq Er PAM_SYSTEM_ERR
System error.
.It Bq Er PAM_TRY_AGAIN
Try again.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%T "X/Open Single Sign-On Service (XSSO) - Pluggable Authentication Modules"
.%D "June 1997"
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
function and this manual page were developed for the
.Fx
Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the
Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.\& under
DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
