.TH IBQUERYERRORS 8 "Jan 24, 2008" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Diagnostics"

.SH NAME
ibqueryerrors.pl \- query and report non-zero IB port counters

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ibqueryerrors.pl
[-a -c -r -R -C <ca_name> -P <ca_port> -s <err1,err2,...> -S <switch_guid> -D <direct_route> -d]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
ibqueryerrors.pl reports the port counters of switches.  This is similar to
ibcheckerrors with the additional ability to filter out selected errors,
include the optional transmit and receive data counters, report actions to
remedy a non-zero count, and report full link information for the link
reported.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
\fB\-a\fR
Report an action to take.  Some of the counters are not errors in and of
themselves.  This reports some more information on what the counters mean and
what actions can/should be taken if they are non-zero.
.TP
\fB\-c\fR
Suppress some of the common "side effect" counters.  These counters usually do
not indicate an error condition and can be usually be safely ignored.
.TP
\fB\-r\fR
Report the port information.  This includes LID, port, external port (if
applicable), link speed setting, remote GUID, remote port, remote external port
(if applicable), and remote node description information.
.TP
\fB\-R\fR
Recalculate the ibnetdiscover information, ie do not use the cached
information.  This option is slower but should be used if the diag tools have
not been used for some time or if there are other reasons to believe that
the fabric has changed.
.TP
\fB\-s <err1,err2,...>\fR
Suppress the errors listed in the comma separated list provided.
.TP
\fB\-S <switch_guid>\fR
Report results only for the switch specified. (hex format)
.TP
\fB\-D <direct_route>\fR
Report results only for the switch specified by the direct route path.
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
Include the optional transmit and receive data counters.
.TP
\fB\-C <ca_name>\fR    use the specified ca_name for the search.
.TP
\fB\-P <ca_port>\fR    use the specified ca_port for the search.


.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Ira Weiny
.RI < weiny2@llnl.gov >

