.TH IBSTAT 8 "July 25, 2006" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Diagnostics"

.SH NAME
ibstat \- query basic status of InfiniBand device(s)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ibstat
[\-d(ebug)] [\-l(ist_of_cas)] [\-s(hort)] [\-p(ort_list)] [\-V(ersion)] [\-h] <ca_name> [portnum]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
ibstat is a binary which displays basic information obtained from the local
IB driver. Output includes LID, SMLID, port state, link width active, and port
physical state.

It is similar to the ibstatus utility but implemented as a binary rather
than a script. It has options to list CAs and/or ports and displays more
information than ibstatus.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-list_of_cas\fR
list all IB devices
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-short\fR
short output
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-port_list\fR
show port list
.TP
ca_name
InfiniBand device name
.TP
portnum
port number of InfiniBand device

.SH COMMON OPTIONS

Most OpenIB diagnostics take the following common flags. The exact list of
supported flags per utility can be found in the usage message and can be shown
using the util_name -h syntax.

# Debugging flags
.PP
\-d      raise the IB debugging level.
        May be used several times (-ddd or -d -d -d).
.PP
\-e      show send and receive errors (timeouts and others)
.PP
\-h      show the usage message
.PP
\-v      increase the application verbosity level.
        May be used several times (-vv or -v -v -v)
.PP
\-V      show the version info.

# Addressing flags
.PP
\-D      use directed path address arguments. The path
        is a comma separated list of out ports.
        Examples:
        "0"             # self port
        "0,1,2,1,4"     # out via port 1, then 2, ...
.PP
\-G      use GUID address argument. In most cases, it is the Port GUID.
        Example:
        "0x08f1040023"
.PP
\-s <smlid>      use 'smlid' as the target lid for SM/SA queries.

# Other common flags:
.PP
\-C <ca_name>    use the specified ca_name.
.PP
\-P <ca_port>    use the specified ca_port.
.PP
\-t <timeout_ms> override the default timeout for the solicited mads.

Multiple CA/Multiple Port Support

When no IB device or port is specified, the port to use is selected
by the following criteria:
.PP
1. the first port that is ACTIVE.
.PP
2. if not found, the first port that is UP (physical link up).

If a port and/or CA name is specified, the user request is
attempted to be fulfilled, and will fail if it is not possible.

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
ibstat            # display status of all ports on all IB devices
.PP
ibstat -l         # list all IB devices
.PP
ibstat -p         # show port guids
.PP
ibstat mthca0 2   # show status of port 2 of 'mthca0'

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ibstatus (8)

.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Hal Rosenstock
.RI < halr@voltaire.com >
