.TH IBTRACERT 8 "April 14, 2007" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Diagnostics"

.SH NAME
ibtracert\- trace InfiniBand path

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ibtracert
[\-d(ebug)] [-v(erbose)] [\-D(irect)] [\-G(uids)] [-n(o_info)] [-m mlid] [-s
smlid] [\-C ca_name] [\-P ca_port] [\-t(imeout) timeout_ms] [\-V(ersion)]
[\-\-node\-name\-\-map <node-name-map>] [\-h(elp)] [<dest dr_path|lid|guid> [<startlid> [<endlid>]]]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
ibtracert uses SMPs to trace the path from a source GID/LID to a
destination GID/LID. Each hop along the path is displayed until the destination
is reached or a hop does not respond. By using the -m option, multicast path
tracing can be performed between source and destination nodes.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
\fB\-n\fR, \fB\-\-no_info\fR
simple format; don't show additional information
.TP
\fB\-m\fR
show the multicast trace of the specified mlid
.TP
\fB\-\-node\-name\-map\fR <node-name-map>
Specify a node name map.  The node name map file maps GUIDs to more user friendly
names.  See
.B ibnetdiscover(8)
for node name map file format.

.SH COMMON OPTIONS

Most OpenIB diagnostics take the following common flags. The exact list of
supported flags per utility can be found in the usage message and can be shown
using the util_name -h syntax.

# Debugging flags
.PP
\-d      raise the IB debugging level.
        May be used several times (-ddd or -d -d -d).
.PP
\-h      show the usage message
.PP
\-v      increase the application verbosity level.
        May be used several times (-vv or -v -v -v)
.PP
\-V      show the version info.

# Addressing flags
.PP
\-D      use directed path address arguments. The path
        is a comma separated list of out ports.
        Examples:
        "0"             # self port
        "0,1,2,1,4"     # out via port 1, then 2, ...
.PP
\-G      use GUID address argument. In most cases, it is the Port GUID.
        Example:
        "0x08f1040023"
.PP
\-s <smlid>      use 'smlid' as the target lid for SM/SA queries.

# Other common flags:
.PP
\-C <ca_name>    use the specified ca_name.
.PP
\-P <ca_port>    use the specified ca_port.
.PP
\-t <timeout_ms> override the default timeout for the solicited mads.

Multiple CA/Multiple Port Support

When no IB device or port is specified, the port to use is selected
by the following criteria:
.PP
1. the first port that is ACTIVE.
.PP
2. if not found, the first port that is UP (physical link up).

If a port and/or CA name is specified, the user request is
attempted to be fulfilled, and will fail if it is not possible.

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
Unicast examples
.PP
ibtracert 4 16              # show path between lids 4 and 16
.PP
ibtracert -n 4 16           # same, but using simple output format
.PP
ibtracert -G 0x8f1040396522d 0x002c9000100d051  # use guid addresses

.PP
Multicast example
.PP
ibtracert -m 0xc000 4 16    # show multicast path of mlid 0xc000 between lids 4 and 16

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ibroute (8)

.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Hal Rosenstock
.RI < halr@voltaire.com >
.TP
Ira Weiny
.RI < weiny2@llnl.gov >
