.TH SMINFO 8 "July 25, 2006" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Diagnostics"

.SH NAME
sminfo \- query InfiniBand SMInfo attribute

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sminfo
[\-d(ebug)] [\-e(rr_show)] -s state -p prio -a activity [\-D(irect)] [\-G(uid)]  [\-C ca_name] [\-P ca_port] [\-t(imeout) timeout_ms] [\-V(ersion)] [\-h(elp)] sm_lid | sm_dr_path [modifier]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Optionally set and display the output of a sminfo query in human readable
format. The target SM is the one listed in the local port info, or the SM
specified by the optional SM lid or by the SM direct routed path.
.PP
Note: using sminfo for any purposes other then simple query may be very
dangerous, and may result in a malfunction of the target SM.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
\fB\-s\fR
set SM state
 0 - not active
 1 - discovering
 2 - standby
 3 - master
.TP
\fB\-p\fR
set priority (0-15)
.TP
\fB\-a\fR
set activity count

.SH COMMON OPTIONS

Most OpenIB diagnostics take the following common flags. The exact list of
supported flags per utility can be found in the usage message and can be shown
using the util_name -h syntax.

# Debugging flags
.PP
\-d      raise the IB debugging level.
        May be used several times (-ddd or -d -d -d).
.PP
\-e      show send and receive errors (timeouts and others)
.PP
\-h      show the usage message
.PP
\-v      increase the application verbosity level.
        May be used several times (-vv or -v -v -v)
.PP
\-V      show the version info.

# Addressing flags
.PP
\-D      use directed path address arguments. The path
        is a comma separated list of out ports.
        Examples:
        "0"             # self port
        "0,1,2,1,4"     # out via port 1, then 2, ...
.PP
\-G      use GUID address argument. In most cases, it is the Port GUID.
        Example:
        "0x08f1040023"
.PP
\-s <smlid>      use 'smlid' as the target lid for SM/SA queries.

# Other common flags:
.PP
\-C <ca_name>    use the specified ca_name.
.PP
\-P <ca_port>    use the specified ca_port.
.PP
\-t <timeout_ms> override the default timeout for the solicited mads.

Multiple CA/Multiple Port Support

When no IB device or port is specified, the port to use is selected
by the following criteria:
.PP
1. the first port that is ACTIVE.
.PP
2. if not found, the first port that is UP (physical link up).

If a port and/or CA name is specified, the user request is
attempted to be fulfilled, and will fail if it is not possible.

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
sminfo                  # local port\'s sminfo
.PP
sminfo 32               # show sminfo of lid 32
.PP
sminfo  -G 0x8f1040023  # same but using guid address

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smpdump (8)

.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Hal Rosenstock
.RI < halr@voltaire.com >
