.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH GROTTY @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
grotty \- groff driver for typewriter-like devices
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grotty
[
.B \-hfbuodBUv
] [
.BI \-F dir
] [
.IR files \|.\|.\|.
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B grotty
translates the output of GNU
.B troff
into a form suitable for typewriter-like devices.
Normally
.B grotty
should invoked by using the
.B groff
command
with a
.BR \-Tascii ,
.B \-Tkoi8-r
or
.B \-Tlatin1
option.
If no files are given,
.B grotty
will read the standard input.
A filename of
.B \-
will also cause
.B grotty
to read the standard input.
Output is written to the standard output.
.LP
Normally
.B grotty
prints a bold character
.I c
using the sequence
.RI ` c
.SM BACKSPACE
.IR c '
and a italic character
.I c
by the sequence
.RB ` _
.SM BACKSPACE
.IR c '.
These sequences can be displayed on a terminal
by piping through
.BR ul (1).
Pagers such as
.BR more (1)
or
.BR less (1)
are also able to display these sequences.
Use either
.B \-B
or
.B \-U
when piping into
.BR less (1);
use
.B \-b
when piping into
.BR more (1).
There is no need to filter the output through
.BR col (1)
since
.B grotty
never outputs reverse line feeds.
.LP
The font description file may contain a command
.IP
.BI internalname\  n
.LP
where
.I n
is a decimal integer.
If the 01 bit in
.I n
is set,
then the font will be treated as an italic font;
if the 02 bit is set,
then it will be treated as a bold font.
The code field in the font description field gives the
code which will be used to output the character.
This code can also be used in the
.B \eN
escape sequence in
.BR troff .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-F dir
Search the directory
.IB dir /dev name
for font and device description files;
.I name
is the name of the device, usually
.BR ascii ,
.B koi8-r
or
.BR latin1 .
.TP
.B \-h
Use horizontal tabs in the output.
Tabs are assumed to be set every 8 columns.
.TP
.B \-f
Use form feeds in the output.
A form feed will be output at the end of each page that has no output
on its last line.
.TP
.B \-b
Suppress the use of overstriking for bold characters.
.TP
.B \-u
Suppress the use of underlining for italic characters.
.TP
.B \-B
Use only overstriking for bold-italic characters.
.TP
.B \-U
Use only underlining for bold-italic characters.
.TP
.B \-o
Suppress overstriking (other than for bold or underlined characters).
.TP
.B \-d
Ignore all
.B \eD
commands.
Without this
.B grotty
will render
.B \eD'l\|.\|.\|.'
commands that have at least at least one zero argument
(and so are either horizontal or vertical)
using
.BR \- ,
.B |
and
.B +
characters.
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version number.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B @FONTDIR@/dev\fIname\fB/DESC
Device description file for
.I name
device.
.TP
.BI @FONTDIR@/dev\fIname\fB/ F
Font description file for font
.I F
of
.I name
device.
.TP
.B @MACRODIR@/tmac.tty
Macros for use with
.BR grotty .
.TP
.B @MACRODIR@/tmac.tty-char
Additional klugey character definitions for use with
.BR grotty .
.SH BUGS
.LP
.B grotty
is intended only for simple documents.
.LP
There is no support for fractional horizontal or vertical motions.
.LP
There is no support for
.B \eD
commands
other than horizontal and vertical lines.
.LP
Characters above the first line (ie with a vertical position of 0)
cannot be printed.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff_out (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR groff_char (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR ul (1),
.BR more (1),
.BR less (1)
