.\" $Id: pic2graph.man,v 1.3 2002/07/17 04:55:46 wlemb Exp $
.\" This documentation is released to the public domain.
.TH PIC2GRAPH @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.IX pic2graph
.SH NAME
pic2graph \- convert a PIC diagram into a cropped image
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pic2graph
[
.B \-unsafe
]
[
.BI \-format\  fmt
]
[
.BI \-eqn\  delim
]
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads a PIC program as input; produces an image file (by default in
Portable Network Graphics format) suitable for the Web as output.
Also translates
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
constructs, so it can be used for generating images of mathematical
formulae.
.P
PIC is a rather expressive graphics minilanguage suitable for
producing box-and-arrow diagrams of the kind frequently used in
technical papers and textbooks.  The language is sufficiently flexible
to be quite useful for state charts, Petri-net diagrams, flow charts,
simple circuit schematics, jumper layouts, and other kinds of
illustration involving repetitive uses of simple geometric forms and
splines.  Because PIC descriptions are procedural and object-based,
they are both compact and easy to modify.
.P
The PIC language is fully documented in "\fIMaking Pictures With GNU
PIC\fP", a document which is part of the
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@)
distribution.
.P
Your input PIC code should \fInot\fR be wrapped with the .PS and .PE macros
that normally guard it within 
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@) 
macros.
.P
The output image will be a black-on-white graphic clipped to the
smallest possible bounding box that contains all the black pixels.
By specifying command-line options to be passed to 
.BR convert (1)
you can give it a border, set the background transparent, set the
image's pixel density, or perform other useful transformations.
.P
This program uses 
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR gs (1),
and the ImageMagick
.BR convert (1)
program.
These programs must be installed on your system and accessible on your
$PATH for \fBpic2graph\fR to work.
.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-unsafe
Run 
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@)
in the `unsafe' mode enabling the PIC macro
.B sh
to execute arbitrary commands.  The default is to forbid this.
.TP
.BI \-format\  fmt
Specify an output format; the default is PNG (Portable Network Graphics).
Any format that
.BR convert (1)
can emit is supported.
.TP
.BI \-eqn\  delim
Change the fencepost characters that delimit 
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
directives
.RB ( $
and
.BR $ ,
by default).  This option requires an argument, but an empty string is
accepted as a directive to disable
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
processing.
.PP
Command-line switches and arguments not listed above are passed to
.BR convert (1).
.
.
.SH FILES
.TP \w'\fB@MACRODIR@/eqnrc'u+2n
.B @MACRODIR@/eqnrc
The 
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
initialization file.
.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR eqn2graph (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR gs (1),
.BR convert (1).
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
Eric S. Raymond <esr@thyrsus.com>, based on a recipe by W. Richard Stevens.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
