.\" Copyright (C) 2004  Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")
.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001  Internet Software Consortium.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ISC DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH
.\" REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
.\" AND FITNESS.  IN NO EVENT SHALL ISC BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE
.\" OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
.\" PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $Id: lwres_getrrsetbyname.3,v 1.11.2.1.8.1 2004/03/06 07:41:43 marka Exp $
.\"
.TH "LWRES_GETRRSETBYNAME" "3" "Oct 18, 2000" "BIND9" ""
.SH NAME
lwres_getrrsetbyname, lwres_freerrset \- retrieve DNS records
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <lwres/netdb.h>
.sp
.na
int
lwres_getrrsetbyname(const char *hostname, unsigned int rdclass, unsigned int rdtype, unsigned int flags, struct rrsetinfo **res);
.ad
.sp
.na
void
lwres_freerrset(struct rrsetinfo *rrset);
.ad
\fR
.PP
The following structures are used:
.sp
.nf
struct  rdatainfo {
        unsigned int            rdi_length;     /* length of data */
        unsigned char           *rdi_data;      /* record data */
};

struct  rrsetinfo {
        unsigned int            rri_flags;      /* RRSET_VALIDATED... */
        unsigned int            rri_rdclass;    /* class number */
        unsigned int            rri_rdtype;     /* RR type number */
        unsigned int            rri_ttl;        /* time to live */
        unsigned int            rri_nrdatas;    /* size of rdatas array */
        unsigned int            rri_nsigs;      /* size of sigs array */
        char                    *rri_name;      /* canonical name */
        struct rdatainfo        *rri_rdatas;    /* individual records */
        struct rdatainfo        *rri_sigs;      /* individual signatures */
};
.sp
.fi
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\fBlwres_getrrsetbyname()\fR
gets a set of resource records associated with a
\fIhostname\fR,
\fIclass\fR,
and
\fItype\fR.
\fIhostname\fR
is
a pointer a to null-terminated string. The
\fIflags\fR
field is currently unused and must be zero.
.PP
After a successful call to
\fBlwres_getrrsetbyname()\fR,
\fI*res\fR
is a pointer to an
\fBrrsetinfo\fR
structure, containing a list of one or more
\fBrdatainfo\fR
structures containing resource records and potentially another list of
\fBrdatainfo\fR
structures containing SIG resource records
associated with those records.
The members
rri_rdclass
and
rri_rdtype
are copied from the parameters.
rri_ttl
and
rri_name
are properties of the obtained rrset.
The resource records contained in
rri_rdatas
and
rri_sigs
are in uncompressed DNS wire format.
Properties of the rdataset are represented in the
rri_flags
bitfield. If the RRSET_VALIDATED bit is set, the data has been DNSSEC
validated and the signatures verified. 
.PP
All of the information returned by
\fBlwres_getrrsetbyname()\fR
is dynamically allocated: the
rrsetinfo
and
rdatainfo
structures,
and the canonical host name strings pointed to by the
rrsetinfostructure.
Memory allocated for the dynamically allocated structures created by
a successful call to
\fBlwres_getrrsetbyname()\fR
is released by
\fBlwres_freerrset()\fR.
\fIrrset\fR
is a pointer to a
\fBstruct rrset\fR
created by a call to
\fBlwres_getrrsetbyname()\fR.
.PP
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.PP
\fBlwres_getrrsetbyname()\fR
returns zero on success, and one of the following error
codes if an error occurred:
.TP
\fBERRSET_NONAME\fR
the name does not exist
.TP
\fBERRSET_NODATA\fR
the name exists, but does not have data of the desired type
.TP
\fBERRSET_NOMEMORY\fR
memory could not be allocated
.TP
\fBERRSET_INVAL\fR
a parameter is invalid
.TP
\fBERRSET_FAIL\fR
other failure
.TP
\fB\fR
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\fBlwres\fR(3).
