.\" Copyright (C) 2004, 2005 Internet Systems Consortium, Inc. ("ISC")
.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001 Internet Software Consortium.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND ISC DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES WITH
.\" REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY
.\" AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL ISC BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE
.\" OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR
.\" PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $Id: lwres_inetntop.3,v 1.12.2.1.8.5 2005/10/13 02:33:53 marka Exp $
.\"
.hy 0
.ad l
.\" ** You probably do not want to edit this file directly **
.\" It was generated using the DocBook XSL Stylesheets (version 1.69.1).
.\" Instead of manually editing it, you probably should edit the DocBook XML
.\" source for it and then use the DocBook XSL Stylesheets to regenerate it.
.TH "LWRES_INETNTOP" "3" "Jun 30, 2000" "BIND9" "BIND9"
.\" disable hyphenation
.nh
.\" disable justification (adjust text to left margin only)
.ad l
.SH "NAME"
lwres_net_ntop \- lightweight resolver IP address presentation
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include <lwres/net.h>
.fi
.HP 28
\fBconst\ char\ *\ \fBlwres_net_ntop\fR\fR\fB(\fR\fBint\ af\fR\fB, \fR\fBconst\ void\ *src\fR\fB, \fR\fBchar\ *dst\fR\fB, \fR\fBsize_t\ size\fR\fB);\fR
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
\fBlwres_net_ntop()\fR
converts an IP address of protocol family
\fIaf\fR
\(em IPv4 or IPv6 \(em at location
\fIsrc\fR
from network format to its conventional representation as a string. For IPv4 addresses, that string would be a dotted\-decimal. An IPv6 address would be represented in colon notation as described in RFC1884.
.PP
The generated string is copied to
\fIdst\fR
provided
\fIsize\fR
indicates it is long enough to store the ASCII representation of the address.
.SH "RETURN VALUES"
.PP
If successful, the function returns
\fIdst\fR: a pointer to a string containing the presentation format of the address.
\fBlwres_net_ntop()\fR
returns
\fBNULL\fR
and sets the global variable
\fBerrno\fR
to
\fBEAFNOSUPPORT\fR
if the protocol family given in
\fIaf\fR
is not supported.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
\fBRFC1884\fR(),
\fBinet_ntop\fR(3),
\fBerrno\fR(3).
