\input texinfo    @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)
@setfilename rluserman.info
@settitle GNU Readline Library
@comment %**end of header (This is for running Texinfo on a region.)

@setchapternewpage odd

@include version.texi

@copying
This manual describes the end user interface of the GNU Readline Library
(version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}), a library which aids in the
consistency of user interface across discrete programs which provide
a command line interface.

Copyright @copyright{} 1988-2006 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is
included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Libraries
@direntry
* RLuserman: (rluserman).       The GNU readline library User's Manual.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title GNU Readline Library User Interface
@subtitle Edition @value{EDITION}, for @code{Readline Library} Version @value{VERSION}.
@subtitle @value{UPDATED-MONTH}
@author Chet Ramey, Case Western Reserve University
@author Brian Fox, Free Software Foundation

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@sp 1
Published by the Free Software Foundation @*
59 Temple Place, Suite 330, @*
Boston, MA 02111-1307 @*
USA @*

@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top GNU Readline Library

This document describes the end user interface of the GNU Readline Library,
a utility which aids in the consistency of user interface across discrete
programs which provide a command line interface.

@menu
* Command Line Editing::	   GNU Readline User's Manual.
* Copying This Manual::		Copying This Manual.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@include rluser.texi

@node Copying This Manual
@appendix Copying This Manual

@menu
* GNU Free Documentation License::	License for copying this manual.
@end menu

@include fdl.texi

@bye
