.\" $Id: getnameinfo.3,v 8.2 2001/12/28 04:24:16 marka Exp $
.\"
.\"Copyright (c) 1998,1999 by Internet Software Consortium
.\"
.\"Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\"purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\"copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\"THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND INTERNET SOFTWARE CONSORTIUM DISCLAIMS
.\"ALL WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\"OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL INTERNET SOFTWARE
.\"CONSORTIUM BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR
.\"PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS
.\"ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\"SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd January 11, 1999
.Dt GETRNAMEINFO @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@
.Sh NAME
.Nm getnameinfo
.Nd address-to-name translation in protocol-independent manner
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/socket.h>
.Fd #include <netdb.h>
.Ft int
.Fn getnameinfo "const struct sockaddr *sa" "socklen_t salen" \
"char *host" "size_t hostlen" "char *serv" "size_t servlen" "int flags"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn getnameinfo
function is defined for protocol-independent address-to-nodename translation.
It performs functionality of 
.Xr gethostbyaddr @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@
and
.Xr getservbyport @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@
in more sophisticated manner.
.Pp
The
.Fa sa
arguement is a pointer to a generic socket address structure of size
.Fa salen .
The arguements
.Fa host
and
.Fa serv
are pointers to buffers to hold the return values.
Their sizes are specified by
.Fa hostlen
and
.Fa servlen
repectively.
Either
.Fa host
or
.Fa serv
may be
.Dv NULL
if the hostname  or service name is not required.
.Pp
The 
.Fa flags
arguement modifies the behaviour of 
.Fn getnameinfo
as follows:
.Pp
If 
.Dv NI_NOFQDN
is set only the unqualified hostname is returned for local fully
qualified names.
.Pp
If
.Dv NI_NUMERICHOST
is set then the numeric form of the hostname is returned.
.Pp
If
.Dv NI_NAMEREQD
is set, then a error is returned if the hostname cannot be looked up.
.Pp
If
.Dv NI_NUMERICSERV
is set then the service is returned in numeric form.
.Pp
If
.Dv NI_DGRAM
is set then the service is UDP based rather than TCP based.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getaddrinfo @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@ ,
.Xr gethostbyaddr @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@ ,
.Xr getservbyport @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@ ,
.Xr hosts @FORMAT_EXT@ ,
.Xr services @FORMAT_EXT@ ,
.Xr hostname @DESC_EXT@ ,
.Xr named @SYS_OPS_EXT@
.Pp
R. Gilligan, S.  Thomson, J. Bound, and W. Stevens,
``Basic Socket Interface Extensions for IPv6,'' RFC2133, April 1997.
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn getaddrinfo
function is defined IEEE POSIX 1003.1g draft specification,
and documented in ``Basic Socket Interface Extensions for IPv6''
(RFC2133).
