.\" ++Copyright++ 1993
.\" -
.\" Copyright (c) 1993
.\"    The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\" 	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\" 	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" -
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1993 by Digital Equipment Corporation.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies, and that
.\" the name of Digital Equipment Corporation not be used in advertising or
.\" publicity pertaining to distribution of the document or software without
.\" specific, written prior permission.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP. DISCLAIMS ALL
.\" WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS.   IN NO EVENT SHALL DIGITAL EQUIPMENT
.\" CORPORATION BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR
.\" PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS
.\" ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" -
.\" --Copyright--
.\" $Id: host.1,v 8.4 2000/02/29 03:50:47 vixie Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 15, 1994
.Dt HOST @CMD_EXT_U@
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm host 
.Nd look up host names using domain server
.Sh SYNOPSIS 
.Nm host 
.Op Fl adlrwv
.Op Fl c Ar class
.Op Fl t Ar querytype
.Ar host 
.Op Ar server 
.Sh DESCRIPTION 
.Ic Host
looks for information about Internet hosts.  It gets this information
from a set of interconnected servers that are spread across the
country.  By default, it simply converts between host names and
Internet addresses.  However, with the 
.Dq Fl t 
or 
.Dq Fl a 
options, it can be used
to find all of the information about this host that is maintained
by the domain server.
.Pp
The arguments can be either host names or host numbers.  The program
first attempts to interpret them as host numbers.  If this fails,
it will treat them as host names.  A host number consists of
four decimal numbers separated by dots, e.g. 128.6.4.194
A host name consists of names separated by dots, e.g. topaz.rutgers.edu.  
Unless the name ends in a dot, the local domain
is automatically tacked on the end.  Thus, a Rutgers user can say
.Pp
.D1 Ic host topaz 
.Pp
and it will actually look up "topaz.rutgers.edu".
If this fails, the name is tried unchanged (in this case, "topaz").
This same convention is used for mail and other network utilities.
The actual suffix to tack on the end is obtained
by looking at the results of a 
.Xr hostname @CMD_EXT@
call, and using everything
starting at the first dot.  (See below for a description of
.Sx CUSTOMIZING HOST NAME LOOKUP . )
.Pp
The first argument is the host name you want to look up.
If this is a number, an 
.Dq inverse query 
is done, i.e. the domain
system looks in a separate set of databases used to convert numbers
to names.
.Pp
The second argument is optional.  It
allows you to specify a particular server to query.  If you don't
specify this argument, the default server (normally the local machine)
is used.
.Pp
If a name is specified, you may see output of three different kinds.
Here is an example that shows all of them:
.Pp
.D1 Ic % host sun4
.Dl sun4.rutgers.edu is a nickname for ATHOS.RUTGERS.EDU
.Dl ATHOS.RUTGERS.EDU has address 128.6.5.46
.Dl ATHOS.RUTGERS.EDU has address 128.6.4.4
.Dl ATHOS.RUTGERS.EDU mail is handled by ARAMIS.RUTGERS.EDU
.Pp
The user has typed the command 
.Dq Ic host sun4 .  
The first line indicates that the name 
.Dq Li sun4.rutgers.edu 
is actually a nickname.  The official host name is 
.Dq Li ATHOS.RUTGERS.EDU .  
The next two lines show the
address.  If a system has more than one network interface, there
will be a separate address for each.  The last line indicates
that 
.Li ATHOS.RUTGERS.EDU 
does not receive its own mail.  Mail for
it is taken by 
.Li ARAMIS.RUTGERS.EDU .  
There may be more than one
such line, since some systems have more than one other system
that will handle mail for them.  Technically, every system that
can receive mail is supposed to have an entry of this kind.  If
the system receives its own mail, there should be an entry
the mentions the system itself; for example,
.Pp
.D1 Li XXX mail is handled by XXX 
.Pp
However, many systems that receive
their own mail do not bother to mention that fact.  If a system
has a 
.Dq Li mail is handled by 
entry, but no address, this indicates
that it is not really part of the Internet, but a system that is
on the network will forward mail to it.  Systems on Usenet, Bitnet,
and a number of other networks have entries of this kind.
.Sh OPTIONS
There are a number of options that can be used before the
host name.  Most of these options are meaningful only to the
staff who have to maintain the domain database.
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl a 
.Dq all ;
this is equivalent to 
.Dq Fl v Fl t Cm any .
.It Fl c Ar class
The 
.Ar class
to look for non-Internet data.
.It Fl d
Turn on debugging.  Network transactions are shown in detail.
.It Fl l
List a complete domain; e.g.:
.Pp
.D1 Ic host -l rutgers.edu
.Pp
will give a listing of all hosts in the rutgers.edu domain.  The 
.Dq Fl t
option is used to filter what information is presented, as you 
would expect.  The default is address information, which also
include PTR and NS records.  The command
.Pp
.D1 Ic host -l -v -t any rutgers.edu
.Pp
will give a complete download of the zone data for rutgers.edu,
in the official master file format.  (However the SOA record is
listed twice, for arcane reasons.)  
.Pp
.Sy NOTE: 
.Dq Fl l 
is implemented by
doing a complete zone transfer and then filtering out the information
that you have asked for.  This command should be used only if it
is absolutely necessary.
.It Fl r
Turn off recursion in the request.
This means that the name server will return only data it has in
its own database.  It will not ask other servers for more 
information.
.It Fl d
Turn on debugging.  Network transactions are shown in detail.
.It Fl s
Chase signatures back to parent key (DNSSEC).
.It Fl t Ar querytype
Allows you to specify a particular 
.Ar querytype 
of information
to be looked up.  The arguments are defined in the man page for
.Xr @INDOT@named @SYS_OPS_EXT@ .
Currently-supported types include: 
.Dq Cm a , 
.Dq Cm ns , 
.Dq Cm md , 
.Dq Cm mf , 
.Dq Cm cname ,
.Dq Cm soa , 
.Dq Cm mb , 
.Dq Cm mg , 
.Dq Cm mr , 
.Dq Cm null , 
.Dq Cm wks , 
.Dq Cm ptr , 
.Dq Cm hinfo , 
.Dq Cm minfo , 
.Dq Cm mx , 
.Dq Cm uinfo ,
.Dq Cm uid , 
.Dq Cm gid , 
.Dq Cm unspec .  
Additionally, the wildcard, which may be written
as either 
.Dq Cm any 
or 
.Dq Cm * ,
can be used to specify any (all) of the above types.  
Types must be given in lower case.
Note that the default is to look first for 
.Dq Cm a , 
and then 
.Dq Cm mx , 
except that if the verbose option is turned on, the default is only 
.Dq Cm a .
The
.Dq Fl t
option is particularly useful for filtering information returned by 
.Ic host ;
see the explanation of the
.Dq Fl l
option, below, for more information.
.It Fl a 
.Dq all ;
this is equivalent to 
.Dq Fl v Fl t Cm any .
.It Fl l
List a complete domain; e.g.:
.Pp
.D1 Ic host -l rutgers.edu
.Pp
will give a listing of all hosts in the rutgers.edu domain.  The 
.Dq Fl t
option is used to filter what information is presented, as you 
would expect.  The default is address information, which also
include PTR and NS records.  The command
.Pp
.D1 Ic host -l -v -t any rutgers.edu
.Pp
will give a complete download of the zone data for rutgers.edu,
in the official master file format.  (However the SOA record is
listed twice, for arcane reasons.)  
.Pp
.Sy NOTE: 
.Dq Fl l 
is implemented by
doing a complete zone transfer and then filtering out the information
the you have asked for.  This command should be used only if it
is absolutely necessary.
.El
.Sh CUSTOMIZING HOST NAME LOOKUP
In general, if the name supplied by the user does not
have any dots in it, a default domain is appended to the end.
This domain can be defined in 
.Pa /etc/resolv.conf , 
but is normally derived
by taking the local hostname after its first dot.  The user can override
this, and specify a different default domain, using the environment
variable
.Ev LOCALDOMAIN .
In addition, the user can supply his own abbreviations for host names.
They should be in a file consisting of one line per abbreviation.
Each line contains an abbreviation, a space, and then the full
host name.  The name file must be contained in the 
.Ev HOSTALIASES 
environment variable.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/resolv.conf  " -compress
.It Ev HOSTALIASES
Name of file containing
.Pq Ar host alias , full hostname
pairs.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/resolv.conf  " -compress
.It Pa /etc/resolv.conf 
See
.Xr resolver @FORMAT_EXT@ .
.It Ev HOSTALIASES
Name of file containing
.Pq Ar host alias , full hostname
pairs.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr @INDOT@named  @SYS_OPS_EXT@ , 
.Xr resolver @FORMAT_EXT@ .
.Sh BUGS
Unexpected effects can happen when you type a name that is not
part of the local domain.  Please always keep in mind the
fact that the local domain name is tacked onto the end of every
name, unless it ends in a dot.  Only if this fails is the name
used unchanged.
.Pp
The 
.Dq Fl l 
option only tries the first name server listed for the
domain that you have requested.  If this server is dead, you
may need to specify a server manually. E.g., to get a listing
of foo.edu, you could try 
.Pp
.D1 Ic host -t ns foo.edu 
.Pp
to get a list of all the name servers for foo.edu, and then try 
.Pp
.D1 Ic host -l foo.edu xxx
.Pp
for all 
.Dq Ic xxx 
on the list of name servers, until you find one that works.
