.\" Copyright (c) 1987 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms are permitted
.\" provided that the above copyright notice and this paragraph are
.\" duplicated in all such forms and that any documentation,
.\" advertising materials, and other materials related to such
.\" distribution and use acknowledge that the software was developed
.\" by the University of California, Berkeley.  The name of the
.\" University may not be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\" from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'' AND WITHOUT ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, WITHOUT LIMITATION, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mkdep.1	5.8 (Berkeley) 10/24/88
.\"
.Dd October 24, 1988
.Dt MKDEP @CMD_EXT_U@
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm mkdep 
.Nd construct Makefile dependency list
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm mkdep
.Op Fl ap
.Op Fl f Ar depend_file
.Op Ar flags 
.Ar
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ic Mkdep
takes a set of flags for the C compiler and a list
of C source files as arguments and constructs a set of 
.Li include
file dependencies which are written into the file 
.Pa depend_file ,
or 
.Dq Pa .depend 
by default.  An example of its use in a 
.Pa Makefile 
might be:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
CFLAGS= -O -DDEBUG -I../include -I.
SRCS= file1.c file2.c

depend:
	mkdep ${CFLAGS} ${SRCS}
.Ed
.Pp
where the macro 
.Dq Li SRCS 
is the list of C source files and the macro
.Dq Li CFLAGS 
is the list of flags for the C compiler.
.Pp
If the 
.Dq Fl p 
option is provided, 
.Ic mkdep 
produces dependencies
of the form 
.Dq Li program: program.c 
so that subsequent calls to 
.Xr make @CMD_EXT@ 
will produce 
.Dq Pa program 
directly from its C module rather than using an intermediate 
.Dq Pa \&.o 
module.  This is useful in directories which
contain many programs, each of whose source is contained in a single
C module.  
.Pp 
The 
.Dq Fl a 
option causes appending to the output file, so that multiple 
.Ic mkdep Ns 's 
may be run from a single 
.Pa Makefile .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cc @CMD_EXT@ , 
.Xr cpp @CMD_EXT@ , 
.Xr make @CMD_EXT@ .
