.\" ++Copyright++ 1985
.\" -
.\" Copyright (c) 1985
.\"    The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\" 	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\" 	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" -
.\" Portions Copyright (c) 1993 by Digital Equipment Corporation.
.\" 
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies, and that
.\" the name of Digital Equipment Corporation not be used in advertising or
.\" publicity pertaining to distribution of the document or software without
.\" specific, written prior permission.
.\" 
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP. DISCLAIMS ALL
.\" WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS.   IN NO EVENT SHALL DIGITAL EQUIPMENT
.\" CORPORATION BE LIABLE FOR ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR
.\" PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS
.\" ACTION, ARISING OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE.
.\" -
.\" --Copyright--
.\"
.\"	from named.8	6.6 (Berkeley) 2/14/89
.\"
.Dd June 26, 1993
.Dt @XFER_INDOT_U@NAMED-XFER @SYS_OPS_EXT_U@ 
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm @XFER_INDOT@named-xfer 
.Nd ancillary agent for inbound zone transfers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm named-xfer
.Fl z Ar zone_to_transfer
.Fl f Ar db_file
.Fl s Ar serial_no
.Op Fl d Ar debuglevel
.Op Fl l Ar debug_log_file
.Op Fl t Ar trace_file
.Op Fl p Ar port#
.Op Fl S 
.Ar nameserver ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Ic Named-xfer
is an ancillary program executed by
.Xr @INDOT@named @SYS_OPS_EXT@
to perform an inbound zone transfer.  It is rarely executed directly, and then
only by system administrators who are trying to debug a zone transfer problem.
See RFC's 1033, 1034, and 1035 for more information on the Internet
name-domain system.
.Pp
Options are:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Fl z Ar zone_to_transfer
specifies the name of the zone to be transferred.
.It Fl f Ar db_file
specifies the name of the 
.Ar db_file 
into which the zone should be dumped
when it is received from the primary server.
.It Fl s Ar serial_no
specifies the serial number of our current copy of this zone.  If the
.Sy SOA RR 
we get from the primary server does not have a serial
number higher than this, the transfer will be aborted.
.It Fl d Ar debuglevel
Print debugging information.
The 
.Ar debuglevel 
is a number determines the level of messages printed.
.It Fl l Ar debug_log_file
Specifies a log file for debugging messages.  The default is system- 
dependent but is usually in
.Pa /var/tmp
or
.Pa /usr/tmp .
Note that this only applies if
.Dq Fl d
is also specified.
.It Fl t Ar trace_file
Specifies a 
.Ar trace_file 
which will contain a protocol trace of the zone
transfer.  This is probably only of interest to people debugging the name
server itself.
.It Fl p Ar port#
Use a different port number.  The default is the standard port number
as returned by 
.Xr getservbyname @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@  
for the service 
.Dq Li domain .
.It Fl S
Perform a restricted transfer of only the SOA, NS records and glue A records
for the zone. The SOA record will not be loaded by 
.Xr @INDOT@named @SYS_OPS_EXT@
but will be used to
determine when to verify the NS records.  See the 
.Dq Li stubs 
directive in
.Xr @INDOT@named @SYS_OPS_EXT@
for more information.
.El
.Pp
Additional arguments are taken as name server addresses in so-called
.Dq dotted-quad 
syntax 
.Em only; 
no host name are allowed here.  At least one address must be specified.  
Any additional addresses will be tried, in order, if the first one fails 
to transfer to us successfully.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hostname @DESC_EXT@ ,
.Xr @INDOT@named @SYS_OPS_EXT@ ,
.Xr resolver @LIB_NETWORK_EXT@ ,
.Xr resolver @FORMAT_EXT@ ,
RFC 882, RFC 883, RFC 973, RFC 974, RFC 1033, RFC 1034, RFC 1035, RFC 1123,
.Dq Name Server Operations Guide for Sy BIND .
