.\" Copyright (c) 1994
.\"    The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\" 	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\" 	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd November 27, 1994
.Dt @INDOT_U@NDC @SYS_OPS_EXT_U@ 
.Os BSD 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm @INDOT@ndc 
.Nd name daemon control interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm @INDOT@ndc
.Ar directive
.Op Ar ... 
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This command allows the name server administrator to send various signals
to the name server, or to restart it.  Zero or more directives may be given,
from the following list:
.Bl -tag -width "querylog"
.It Ic status
Displays the current status of
.Xr @INDOT@named @SYS_OPS_EXT@
as shown by
.Xr ps @CMD_EXT@ .
.It Ic dumpdb
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to dump its database and cache to
.Pa /var/tmp/named_dump.db
(uses the 
.Dv INT 
signal.)
.It Ic reload
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to check the serial numbers of all primary and secondary zones
and to reload those that have changed (uses the 
.Dv HUP 
signal.)
.It Ic stats
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to dump its statistics to
.Pa /var/tmp/named.stats
(uses the 
.Dv IOT 
or 
.Dv ABRT 
signal.)
.It Ic trace
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to increment its 
.Dq tracing level 
by one.  Whenever the tracing level
is nonzero, trace information will be written to
.Pa /var/tmp/named.run .
Higher tracing levels result in more detailed information.
(Uses the 
.Dv USR1 
signal.)
.It Ic notrace
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to set its 
.Dq tracing level 
to zero, closing 
.Pa /var/tmp/named.run , 
if it is open (uses the 
.Dv USR2 
signal.)
.It Ic querylog
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to toggle the 
.Dq query logging 
feature, which while on will result in a
.Xr syslog @SYSCALL_EXT@
of each incoming query (uses the 
.Dv WINCH 
signal.)  Note that query logging
consumes quite a lot of log file space.  This directive may also be given as
.Ic qrylog .
.It Ic start
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to be started, as long as it isn't already running.
.It Ic stop
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to be stopped, if it is running.
.It Ic restart
Causes
.Ic @INDOT@named
to be killed and restarted.
.El
.Sh BUGS
Arguments to
.Ic @INDOT@named
are not preserved by
.Ic restart ,
or known by
.Ic start .
.Pp
Some mechanism for controlling the parameters and environment should exist.
.Pp
Implemented as a
.Xr sh @CMD_EXT@
script.
.Sh AUTHOR
Paul Vixie (Internet Software Consortium)
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr @INDOT@named @SYS_OPS_EXT@ ,
.Xr @INDOT@named.reload @SYS_OPS_EXT@ ,
.Xr @INDOT@named.restart @SYS_OPS_EXT@ .
