.TH "DAT.CONF" "5" "25 March 2008" "" ""
.SH NAME
dat.conf \- configuration file for static registration of user-level DAT rdma providers
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.PP
The DAT (direct access transport) architecture supports the use of 
multiple DAT providers within a single consumer application. 
Consumers implicitly select a provider using the Interface Adapter 
name parameter passed to dat_ia_open().
.PP
The subsystem that maps Interface Adapter names to provider
implementations is known as the DAT registry. When a consumer calls
dat_ia_open(), the appropriate provider is found and notified of the
consumer's request to access the IA. After this point, all DAT API
calls acting on DAT objects are automatically directed to the
appropriate provider entry points.
.PP
A persistent, administratively configurable database is used to store
mappings from IA names to provider information. This provider
information includes: the file system path to the provider library
object, version information, and thread safety information. The
location and format of the registry is platform dependent. This
database is known as the Static Registry (SR) and is provided via
entries in the \fIdat.conf\fR file. The process of adding a provider 
entry is termed Static Registration.
.PP
.SH "Registry File Format"
\br 
    * All characters after # on a line are ignored (comments).
    * Lines on which there are no characters other than whitespace
      and comments are considered blank lines and are ignored.
    * Non-blank lines must have seven whitespace separated fields.
      These fields may contain whitespace if the field is quoted
      with double quotes. Within fields quoated with double quotes,
      the backslash or qoute are valid escape sequences:
    * Each non-blank line will contain the following fields:
        - The IA Name.
        - The API version of the library:
          [k|u]major.minor where "major" and "minor" are both integers
          in decimal format. User-level examples: "u1.2", and "u2.0".
        - Whether the library is thread-safe: [threadsafe|nonthreadsafe]
        - Whether this is the default section: [default|nondefault]
        - The library image, version included, to be loaded.
        - The vendor id and version of DAPL provider: id.major.minor  
        - ia params, IA specific parameters - device name and port
        - platform params, (not used) 
.PP
.SH Example netdev entries for OpenFabrics rdma_cm providers, both v1.2 and v2.0 
\br 
        OpenIB-cma u1.2 nonthreadsafe default libdaplcma.so.1 dapl.1.2 "ib0 0" ""
        ofa-v2-ib0 u2.0 nonthreadsafe default libdaplofa.so.2 dapl.2.0 "ib0 0" ""

        NOTE: The OpenFabrics providers use <ia_params> to specify the device with one of the following:
              network address, network hostname, or netdev name; along with port number.

              The OpenIB- and ofa-v2- IA names are unique mappings. Reserved for OpenFabrics providers. 
.PP
The default location for this configuration file is /etc/dat.conf. 
The file location may be overridden with the environment variable DAT_OVERRIDE=/your_own_directory/your_dat.conf. 
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.PP
