.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Alexander Motin <mav@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 14, 2010
.Dt attimer 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm attimer
.Nd i8254 Programmable Interval Timer (AT Timer) driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
This driver is a mandatory part of x86 kernels.
.Pp
The following tunables are settable from the
.Xr loader 8 :
.Bl -ohang
.It Va hint.attimer. Ns Ar X Ns Va .clock
controls event timers functionality support. Setting to 0, disables it.
Default value is 1.
.It Va hint.attimer. Ns Ar X Ns Va .timecounter
controls time counter functionality support. Setting to 0, disables it.
Default value is 1.
.It Va hw.i8254.freq
allows to override default counter frequency.
The same value is also available in run-time via
.Va machdep.i8254_freq
sysctl.
.El
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver uses i8254 Programmable Interval Timer (AT Timer) hardware
to supply kernel with one time counter and one event timer, and generate
sound tones for system speaker.
This hardware includes three channels.
Each channel includes 16bit counter, counting down with known,
platform-dependent frequency.
Counters can operate in several different modes, including periodic and
one-shot.
Output of each channel has platform-defined wiring: one channel is wired
to the interrupt controller and may be used as event timer, one channel is
wired to speaker and used to generate sound tones, and one timer is reserved
for platform purposes.
.Pp
Driver uses single hardware channel to provide both time counter and event
timer functionality.
To make it possible, respective counter must be running in periodic more.
As result, one-shot event timer mode supported only when time counter
functionality is disabled.
.Pp
Event timer provided by the driver is irrelevant to CPU power states.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr atrtc 4 ,
.Xr hpet 4 ,
.Xr eventtimers 7
