.\" @(#)rpcinfo.8c	2.2 88/08/03 4.0 RPCSRC; from 1.24 88/02/25 SMI
.TH RPCINFO 8C "17 December 1987"
.SH NAME
rpcinfo \- report RPC information
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "rpcinfo \-p"
[
.I host
]
.LP
.B "rpcinfo"
[
.B \-n
.I portnum
]
.B \-u
.I host
.I program
[
.I version
]
.LP
.B "rpcinfo"
[
.B \-n
.I portnum
]
.B \-t
.I host
.I program
[
.I version
]
.LP
.B "rpcinfo \-b"
.I program
.I version
.LP
.B "rpcinfo \-d"
.I program
.I version
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rpcinfo
makes an
.SM RPC
call to an
.SM RPC
server and reports what it finds.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-p
Probe the portmapper on
.IR host ,
and print a list of all registered
.SM RPC
programs.  If
.I host
is not specified, it defaults to the value returned by
.BR hostname (1).
.TP
.B \-u
Make an
.SM RPC
call to procedure 0 of
.I program
on the specified
.I host
using
.SM UDP\s0,
and report whether a response was received.
.TP
.B \-t
Make an
.SM RPC
call to procedure 0 of
.I program
on the specified
.I host
using
.SM TCP\s0,
and report whether a response was received.
.TP
.B \-n
Use
.I portnum
as the port number for the
.I \-t
and
.I \-u
options instead of the port number given by the portmapper.
.TP
.B \-b
Make an
.SM RPC
broadcast to procedure 0 of the specified
.I program
and
.I version
using
.SM UDP
and report all hosts that respond.
.TP
.B \-d
Delete registration for the
.SM RPC
service of the specified
.I program
and
.IR version .
This option can be exercised only by the super-user.
.LP
The
.I program
argument can be either a name or a number.
.LP
If a
.I version
is specified,
.B rpcinfo
attempts to call that version of the specified
.IR program .
Otherwise,
.B rpcinfo
attempts to find all the registered version
numbers for the specified
.I program
by calling version 0 (which is presumed not
to exist; if it does exist,
.B rpcinfo
attempts to obtain this information by calling
an extremely high version
number instead) and attempts to call each registered version.
Note: the version number is required for
.B \-b
and
.B \-d
options.
.SH EXAMPLES
To show all of the
.SM RPC
services registered on the local machine use:
.IP
.B example% rpcinfo -p
.LP
To show all of the
.SM RPC
services registered on the machine named
.B klaxon
use:
.IP
.B example% rpcinfo -p klaxon
.LP
To show all machines on the local net that are running the Yellow Pages
service use:
.IP
.B "example% rpcinfo -b ypserv 'version' | uniq"
.LP
where 'version' is the current Yellow Pages version obtained from the
results of the
.B \-p
switch above.
.LP
To delete the registration for version 1 of the
.B walld
service use:
.IP
.B example% rpcinfo -d walld 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR rpc (5),
.BR portmap (8C)
.LP
.I "\s-1RPC\s0 Programming Guide"
.SH BUGS
In releases prior to Sun\s-1OS\s0
3.0, the Network File System (\s-1NFS\s0) did not
register itself with the
portmapper;
.B rpcinfo
cannot be used to make
.SM RPC
calls to the
.SM NFS
server on hosts running such releases.
