.\" info(5)
.\" $Id: info.5,v 1.1 2002/08/25 23:38:38 karl Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.TH INFO 5 "GNU Info" "FSF"
.SH NAME
info \- readable online documentation
.SH DESCRIPTION
The Info file format is an easily-parsable representation for online
documents.  It can be read by
.I emacs(1)
and
.I info(1)
among other programs.
.PP
Info files are usually created from
.I texinfo(5)
sources by
.IR makeinfo(1) ,
but can be created from scratch if so desired.
.PP
For a full description of the Texinfo language and associated tools,
please see the Texinfo manual (written in Texinfo itself).  Most likely,
running this command from your shell:
.RS
.I info texinfo
.RE
or this key sequence from inside Emacs:
.RS
.I M-x info RET m texinfo RET
.RE
will get you there.
.SH AVAILABILITY
ftp://ftp.gnu.org/pub/gnu/texinfo-<version>.tar.gz
.br
or any GNU mirror site.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Please send bug reports to bug-texinfo@gnu.org,
general questions and discussion to help-texinfo@gnu.org.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
info(1), install-info(1), makeinfo(1), texi2dvi(1),
.br
texindex(1).
.br
emacs(1), tex(1).
.br
texinfo(5).
