.\" texinfo(5)
.\" $Id: texinfo.5,v 1.1 2002/09/03 23:44:57 karl Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1998, 1999, 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
.\" manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
.\" preserved on all copies.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
.\" this manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
.\" the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
.\" permission notice identical to this one.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
.\" manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
.\" versions, except that this permission notice may be stated in a
.\" translation approved by the Foundation.
.\"
.TH TEXINFO 5 "GNU Texinfo" "FSF"
.SH NAME
texinfo \- software documentation system
.SH DESCRIPTION
Texinfo is a documentation system that uses a single source file to
produce both online information and printed output.  It is primarily
designed for writing software manuals.
.PP
For a full description of the Texinfo language and associated tools,
please see the Texinfo manual (written in Texinfo itself).  Most likely,
running this command from your shell:
.RS
.I info texinfo
.RE
or this key sequence from inside Emacs:
.RS
.I M-x info RET m texinfo RET
.RE
will get you there.
.SH AVAILABILITY
ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/texinfo/
.br
or any GNU mirror site.
.SH "REPORTING BUGS"
Please send bug reports to bug-texinfo@gnu.org,
general questions and discussion to help-texinfo@gnu.org.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
info(1), install-info(1), makeinfo(1), texi2dvi(1), texindex(1).
.br
emacs(1), tex(1).
.br
info(5).
