.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Apple Computer, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 
.\" 2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 
.\" 3.  Neither the name of Apple Computer, Inc. ("Apple") nor the names of
.\"     its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"     from this software without specific prior written permission. 
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY APPLE AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL APPLE OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $P4: //depot/projects/trustedbsd/openbsm/man/audit_user.5#7 $
.\"
.Dd February 5, 2006
.Dt AUDIT_USER 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm audit_user
.Nd "specifies events to be audited for the given users"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm 
file specifies which audit event classes are to be audited for the given users.
If specified, these flags are combined with the system-wide audit flags in the
.Pa audit_control
file to determine which classes of events to audit for that user.
These settings take effect when the user logs in.
.Pp
Each line maps a user name to a list of classes that should be audited and a
list of classes that should not be audited. 
Entries are of the form:
.Pp
.Dl username:alwaysaudit:neveraudit
.Pp
In the format above,
.Vt alwaysaudit
is a set of event classes that are always audited, and
.Vt neveraudit
is a set of event classes that should not be audited.
These sets can indicate
the inclusion or exclusion of multiple classes, and whether to audit successful
or failed events.
See
.Xr audit_control 5
for more information about audit flags.
.Pp
Example entries in this file are:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
root:lo,ad:no
jdoe:-fc,ad:+fw
.Ed
.Pp
These settings would cause login/logout and administrative events that
succeed on behalf of user root to be audited.
No failure events are audited.
For the user
.Em jdoe ,
failed file creation events are audited, administrative events are
audited, and successful file write events are never audited.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/security/audit_user" -compact
.It Pa /etc/security/audit_user
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit_control 5
.Sh AUTHORS
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include Wayne Salamon, Robert Watson, and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc. in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
