.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Apple Computer, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1.  Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer. 
.\" 2.  Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution. 
.\" 3.  Neither the name of Apple Computer, Inc. ("Apple") nor the names of
.\"     its contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"     from this software without specific prior written permission. 
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY APPLE AND ITS CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS" AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL APPLE OR ITS CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $P4: //depot/projects/trustedbsd/openbsm/man/audit_control.5#13 $
.\"
.Dd January 4, 2006
.Dt AUDIT_CONTROL 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm audit_control
.Nd "contains audit system parameters"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file contains several audit system parameters.
Each line of this file is of the form:
.Pp
.Dl parameter:value
.Pp
The parameters are:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa dir
The directory where audit log files are stored.
There may be more than one of these entries.
Changes to this entry can only be enacted by restarting the
audit system.
See
.Xr audit 1
for a description of how to restart the audit system.
.It Va flags
Specifies which audit event classes are audited for all users.  
.Xr audit_user 5
describes how to audit events for individual users.
See the information below for the format of the audit flags.
.It Va naflags
Contains the audit flags that define what classes of events are audited when
an action cannot be attributed to a specific user.
.It Va minfree
The minimum free space required on the file system audit logs are being written to.
When the free space falls below this limit a warning will be issued.
Not currently used as the value of 20 percent is chosen by the kernel.
.It Va policy
A list of global audit policy flags specifying various behaviors, such as
fail stop, auditing of paths and arguments, etc.
.It Va filesz
Maximum trail size in bytes; if set to a non-0 value, the audit daemon will
rotate the audit trail file at around this size.
Sizes less than the minimum trail size (default of 512K) will be rejected as
invalid.
If 0, trail files will not be automatically rotated based on file size.
.El
.Sh AUDIT FLAGS
Audit flags are a comma-delimited list of audit classes as defined in the
.Pa audit_class
file.
See
.Xr audit_class 5
for details.
Event classes may be preceded by a prefix which changes their interpretation.
The following prefixes may be used for each class:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact -offset indent
.It (none)
Record both successful and failed events
.It +
Record successful events
.It -
Record failed events
.It ^
Record neither successful nor failed events
.It ^+
Do not record successful events
.It ^-
Do not record failed events
.El
.Sh AUDIT POLICY FLAGS
The policy flags field is a comma-delimited list of policy flags from the
following list:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width zonename -compact -offset indent
.It cnt
Allow processes to continue running even though events are not being audited.
If not set, processes will be suspended when the audit store space is
exhausted.
Currently, this is not a recoverable state.
.It ahlt
Fail stop the system if unable to audit an event--this consists of first
draining pending records to disk, and then halting the operating system.
.It argv
Audit command line arguments to
.Xr execve 2 .
.It arge
Audit environmental variable arguments to
.Xr execve 2 .
.It seq
Include a unique audit sequence number token in generated audit records (not
implemented on FreeBSD or Darwin).
.It group
Include supplementary groups list in generated audit records (not implemented
on FreeBSD or Darwin; supplementary groups are never included in records on
these systems).
.It trail
Append a trailer token to each audit record (not implemented on FreeBSD or
Darwin; trailers are always included in records on these systems).
.It path
Include secondary file paths in audit records (not implemented on FreeBSD or
Darwin; secondary paths are never included in records on these systems).
.It zonename
Include a zone ID token with each audit record (not implemented on FreeBSD or
Darwin; FreeBSD audit records do not currently include the jail ID or name.)
.It perzone
Enable auditing for each local zone (not implemented on FreeBSD or Darwin; on
FreeBSD, audit records are collected from all jails and placed in a single
global trail, and only limited audit controls are permitted within a jail.)
.El
.Pp
It is recommended that installations set the
.Dv cnt
flag but not
.Dv ahlt
flag unless it is intended that audit logs exceeding available disk space
halt the system.
.Sh DEFAULT
The following settings appear in the default
.Nm
file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dir:/var/audit
flags:lo
minfree:20
naflags:lo
policy:cnt
filesz:0
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va flags
parameter above specifies the system-wide mask corresponding to login/logout
events.
The
.Va policy
parameter specifies that the system should neither fail stop nor suspend
processes when the audit store fills.
The trail file will not be automatically rotated by the audit daemon based on
file size.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/security/audit_control" -compact
.It Pa /etc/security/audit_control
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit_class 5 ,
.Xr audit_user 5 ,
.Xr audit 8 ,
.Xr auditd 8
.Sh AUTHORS
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include Wayne Salamon, Robert Watson, and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc. in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
