.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $P4: //depot/projects/trustedbsd/openbsm/man/setaudit.2#5 $
.\"
.Dd April 19, 2005
.Dt SETAUDIT 2
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm setaudit ,
.Nm setaudit_addr
.Nd "Set audit session state"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In bsm/audit.h
.Ft int
.Fn setaudit "auditinfo_t *auditinfo"
.Ft int
.Fn setaudit_addr "auditinfo_addr_t *auditinfo" "u_int length"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
sets the active audit session state for the current process via the
.Vt auditinfo_t
pointed to by
.Va auditinfo .
.Fn setaudit_addr
sets extended state via
.Va auditinfo_addr
and
.Va length .
.Pp
This system call requires appropriate privilege to complete.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Nm
returns 0 on success, or returns -1 on failure, providing additional error
information via
.Va errno .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr audit 2 ,
.Xr auditon 2 ,
.Xr getaudit 2 ,
.Xr getauid 2 ,
.Xr setauid 2 ,
.Xr getaudit 2 ,
.Xr libbsm 3
.Sh AUTHORS
This software was created by McAfee Research, the security research division
of McAfee, Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc.
Additional authors include Wayne Salamon, Robert Watson, and SPARTA Inc.
.Pp
The Basic Security Module (BSM) interface to audit records and audit event
stream format were defined by Sun Microsystems.
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Robert Watson Aq rwatson@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh HISTORY
The OpenBSM implementation was created by McAfee Research, the security
division of McAfee Inc., under contract to Apple Computer Inc. in 2004.
It was subsequently adopted by the TrustedBSD Project as the foundation for
the OpenBSM distribution.
