.TH OSMTEST 8 "August 11, 2008" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Management"

.SH NAME
osmtest \- InfiniBand subnet manager and administration (SM/SA) test program

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B osmtest
[\-f(low) <c|a|v|s|e|f|m|q|t>] [\-w(ait) <trap_wait_time>] [\-d(ebug) <number>]
[\-m(ax_lid) <LID in hex>] [\-g(uid)[=]<GUID in hex>] [-p(ort)]
[\-i(nventory) <filename>] [\-s(tress)] [\-M(ulticast_Mode)]
[\-t(imeout) <milliseconds>] [\-l | \-\-log_file] [\-v] [\-vf <flags>]
[\-h(elp)]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
osmtest is a test program to validate InfiniBand subnet manager and
administration (SM/SA).

Default is to run all flows with the exception of the QoS flow.

osmtest provides a test suite for opensm.

osmtest has the following capabilities and testing flows:

It creates an inventory file of all available Nodes, Ports, and PathRecords,
including all their fields.
It verifies the existing inventory, with all the object fields, and matches it
to a pre-saved one.
A Multicast Compliancy test.
An Event Forwarding test.
A Service Record registration test.
An RMPP stress test.
A Small SA Queries stress test.

It is recommended that after installing opensm, the user should run
"osmtest -f c" to generate the inventory file, and
immediately afterwards run "osmtest -f a" to test OpenSM.

Another recommendation for osmtest usage is to create the inventory when the
IB fabric is stable, and occasionally
run "osmtest -v" to verify that nothing has changed.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
\fB\-f\fR, \fB\-\-flow\fR
This option directs osmtest to run a specific flow:
 FLOW  DESCRIPTION
 c = create an inventory file with all nodes, ports and paths
 a = run all validation tests (expecting an input inventory)
 v = only validate the given inventory file
 s = run service registration, deregistration, and lease test
 e = run event forwarding test
 f = flood the SA with queries according to the stress mode
 m = multicast flow
 q = QoS info: dump VLArb and SLtoVL tables
 t = run trap 64/65 flow (this flow requires running of external tool)
 (default is all flows except QoS)
.TP
\fB\-w\fR, \fB\-\-wait\fR
This option specifies the wait time for trap 64/65 in seconds
It is used only when running -f t - the trap 64/65 flow
(default to 10 sec)
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-debug\fR
This option specifies a debug option.
These options are not normally needed.
The number following -d selects the debug
option to enable as follows:

 OPT   Description
 ---    -----------------
 -d0  - Ignore other SM nodes
 -d1  - Force single threaded dispatching
 -d2  - Force log flushing after each log message
 -d3  - Disable multicast support
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-max_lid\fR
This option specifies the maximal LID number to be searched
for during inventory file build (default to 100)
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-guid\fR
This option specifies the local port GUID value
with which OpenSM should bind.  OpenSM may be
bound to 1 port at a time.
If GUID given is 0, OpenSM displays a list
of possible port GUIDs and waits for user input.
Without -g, OpenSM trys to use the default port.
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-port\fR
This option displays a menu of possible local port GUID values
with which osmtest could bind
.TP
\fB\-i\fR, \fB\-\-inventory\fR
This option specifies the name of the inventory file
Normally, osmtest expects to find an inventory file,
which osmtest uses to validate real-time information
received from the SA during testing
If -i is not specified, osmtest defaults to the file
\'osmtest.dat\'
See -c option for related information
.TP
\fB\-s\fR, \fB\-\-stress\fR
This option runs the specified stress test instead
of the normal test suite
Stress test options are as follows:

 OPT    Description
 ---    -----------------
 -s1  - Single-MAD response SA queries
 -s2  - Multi-MAD (RMPP) response SA queries
 -s3  - Multi-MAD (RMPP) Path Record SA queries

Without -s, stress testing is not performed
.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-Multicast_Mode\fR
This option specify length of Multicast test:

 OPT    Description
 ---    -----------------
 -M1  - Short Multicast Flow (default) - single mode
 -M2  - Short Multicast Flow - multiple mode
 -M3  - Long Multicast Flow - single mode
 -M4  - Long Multicast Flow - multiple mode

Single mode - Osmtest is tested alone, with no other
apps that interact with OpenSM MC

Multiple mode - Could be run with other apps using MC with
OpenSM. Without -M, default flow testing is performed
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-timeout\fR
This option specifies the time in milliseconds
used for transaction timeouts.
Specifying -t 0 disables timeouts.
Without -t, OpenSM defaults to a timeout value of
200 milliseconds.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-log_file\fR
This option defines the log to be the given file.
By default the log goes to stdout.
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbose\fR
This option increases the log verbosity level.
The -v option may be specified multiple times
to further increase the verbosity level.
See the -vf option for more information about.
log verbosity.
.TP
\fB\-V\fR
This option sets the maximum verbosity level and
forces log flushing.
The -V is equivalent to '-vf 0xFF -d 2'.
See the -vf option for more information about.
log verbosity.
.TP
\fB\-vf\fR
This option sets the log verbosity level.
A flags field must follow the -D option.
A bit set/clear in the flags enables/disables a
specific log level as follows:

 BIT    LOG LEVEL ENABLED
 ----   -----------------
 0x01 - ERROR (error messages)
 0x02 - INFO (basic messages, low volume)
 0x04 - VERBOSE (interesting stuff, moderate volume)
 0x08 - DEBUG (diagnostic, high volume)
 0x10 - FUNCS (function entry/exit, very high volume)
 0x20 - FRAMES (dumps all SMP and GMP frames)
 0x40 - ROUTING (dump FDB routing information)
 0x80 - currently unused.

Without -vf, osmtest defaults to ERROR + INFO (0x3)
Specifying -vf 0 disables all messages
Specifying -vf 0xFF enables all messages (see -V)
High verbosity levels may require increasing
the transaction timeout with the -t option
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Display this usage info then exit.

.SH AUTHORS
.TP
Hal Rosenstock
.RI < hal@xsigo.com >
.TP
Eitan Zahavi
.RI < eitan@mellanox.co.il >
