.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Alexey Zelkin <phantom@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 13, 2003
.Dt PTHREAD_SWITCH_ADD_NP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_switch_add_np ,
.Nm pthread_switch_delete_np
.Nd threads context switches debugging primitives
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libc_r
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread_np.h
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_switch_add_np "pthread_switch_routine_t routine"
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_switch_delete_np "pthread_switch_routine_t routine"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The application is allowed to monitor thread context switches inside
threading library.
An application can install routine that gets called everytime a thread
(explicitly created by the application with
.Fn pthread_create
function) gets context switched.
This routine gets passed the pthread IDs of the threads that are
being switched in and out.
Installation and removal of these hooks may be done using
.Fn pthread_switch_add_np
and
.Fn pthread_switch_delete_np
functions respectively.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
functions return 0. 
Otherwise, an error number is returned to indicate the error.
.Sh ERRORS
The
.Fn pthread_switch_add_np
may fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
NULL pointer passed as
.Fa routine
argument.
.El
The
.Fn pthread_switch_delete_np
may fail if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EINVAL
.Fa routine
argument is different from argument previously passed to
.Fn pthread_switch_add_np
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pthread_create 3
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
manpage was written by
.An Alexey Zelkin
.Aq phantom@FreeBSD.org

