.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Alexey Zelkin <phantom@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 13, 2003
.Dt PTHREAD_SET_NAME_NP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_set_name_np
.Nd set the thread name
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libc_r
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread_np.h
.Ft void
.Fn pthread_set_name_np "pthread_t tid" "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pthread_set_name_np
function sets internal name for thread specified by
.Fa tid
argument to string value specified by
.Fa name
argument.
.Pp
This is a debugging interface and using it on a day-by-day basis makes
no sense.
.Sh ERRORS
Because of the debugging nature of this function, all errors that may
appear inside are silently ignored.
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alexey Zelkin Aq phantom@FreeBSD.org .
