.\" Copyright (C) 2000 Jason Evans <jasone@FreeBSD.org>.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in
.\"    the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
.\"    distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR
.\" BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY,
.\" WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE
.\" OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd February 15, 2000
.Dt SEM_OPEN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sem_open ,
.Nm sem_close ,
.Nm sem_unlink
.Nd named semaphore operations
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libc_r
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In semaphore.h
.Ft sem_t *
.Fn sem_open "const char *name" "int oflag" "..."
.Ft int
.Fn sem_close "sem_t *sem"
.Ft int
.Fn sem_unlink "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn sem_open ,
.Fn sem_close ,
and
.Fn sem_unlink
functions are not supported by this implementation.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn sem_open
returns SEM_FAILED and sets
.Va errno
to indicate an error.
.Fn sem_close
and
.Fn sem_unlink
return -1 and set
.Va errno
to indicate an error.
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn sem_open ,
.Fn sem_close ,
and
.Fn sem_unlink
will fail:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOSYS
Function not supported by this implementation.
.El
.Sh STANDARDS
.Fn sem_open ,
.Fn sem_close ,
and
.Fn sem_unlink
conform to
.St -p1003.1-96 .
