'\" t
.\" The above line should force the use of tbl as a preprocessor
.\" vim: set syntax=nroff : 
.\" The above line should set vim into nroff mode
.ig
Copyright (C) 1994-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.

Modified by Francisco Andrés Verdú <pandres@dragonet.es> for the grolbp
program.
..
.de TQ
.br
.ns
.TP \\$1
..
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.TH GROLBP @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
grolbp \- groff driver for Canon CAPSL printers (LBP-4 and LBP-8 series laser printers).
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nr a \n(.j
.ad l
.nr i \n(.i
.in +\w'\fBgrolbp 'u
.ti \niu
.B grolpb
.de OP
.ie \\n(.$-1 .RI "[\ \fB\\$1\fP" "\\$2" "\ ]"
.el .RB "[\ " "\\$1" "\ ]"
..
.OP \-l
.OP \-\-landscape
.OP \-v
.OP \-\-version
.OP \-c n
.OP \-\-copies= numcopies
.OP \-p paper_size
.OP \-\-papersize= paper_size
.OP \-o orientation
.OP \-\-orientation= orientation
.OP \-F dir
.OP \-\-fontdir= dir
.OP \-h
.OP \-\-help
.RI "[\ " files\|.\|.\|. "\ ]"
.br
.ad \na
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B grolbp
is a driver for
.B groff
that produces output in CAPSL and VDM format suitable for Canon LBP\-4 and
LBP\-8 printers.
.LP
For compatibility with grolj4 there is an additional drawing command
available:
.TP
.BI \eD'R\  dh\ dv '
Draw a rule (i.e.\ a solid black rectangle), with one corner at the current
position, and the diagonally opposite corner at the current position
.RI +( dh , dv ).
.SH OPTIONS
Note that there can be whitespace between a one-letter option and its
argument; on the other hand, there must be whitespace and/or an equal sign
(`=') between a long-name option and its argument.
.TP
.BI \-c numcopies
.TQ
.BI \-\-copies= numcopies
Print
.I numcopies
copies of each page.
.TP
.B \-l
.TQ
.B \-\-landscape
Print the document with a landscape orientation.
.TP
.BI \-p paper_size
.TQ
.BI \-\-papersize= paper_size
Set the paper size to
.IR paper_size ,
which must be a valid paper size description as indicated in the section
.BR "PAPER SIZES" .
.TP
.BI \-o orientation
.TQ
.BI \-\-orientation= orientation
Print the document with
.I orientation
orientation, which must be `portrait' or `landscape'.
.TP
.B \-v
.TQ
.B \-\-version
Print the version number.
.TP
.BI \-F dir
.TQ
.BI \-\-fontdir= dir
Search directory
.IB dir /devlbp
for font and device description files.
.TP
.B \-h
.TQ
.B \-\-help
Print a short help text.
.SH TYPEFACES
The driver supports the Dutch, Swiss and Swiss-Narrow scalable typefaces,
each one in the Regular, Bold, Italic and Bold-Italic styles.
Additionally, the Courier and Elite monospaced typefaces at the sizes 8 and
12 points (for Courier) resp. 8 and 10 points (for Elite) are supported,
each one in the Regular, Bold and Italic styles.
.PP
The following chart summarizes the font names you can use to access these
fonts:
.PP
.TS
tab(|) allbox center;
c c c c c
ab c c c c
.
Typeface | Regular | Bold | Italic | Bold-Italic
Dutch | TR | TB | TI | TBI
Swiss | HR | HB | HI | HBI
Swiss Narrow | HNR | HNB | HNI | HNBI
Courier | CR | CB | CI |
Elite | ER | EB | EI |
.TE
.PP
.SH PAPER SIZES
The paper size can be set in the
.B DESC
file or with command line options to
.BR grolbp .
If the paper size is specified both ways, the command line options take
precedence over the contents of the
.B DESC
file (this applies to the page orientation too).
.PP
To set the paper size in the
.B DESC
file, insert in that file a line containing
.B papersize
.IR desired_papersize ,
where
.I desired_papersize
is:
.IP \(bu 4
One of the recognized paper sizes: `a4', `letter', `legal' or `executive'.
.IP \(bu 4
A custom defined paper size, as described in the
.B CUSTOM PAPER SIZES
subsection below.
.IP \(bu 4
The name of a file (e.g.
.IR /etc/papersize )
whose first line must be the desired paper size in one of the above formats.
.PP
If there are various papersize lines in the
.B DESC
file, only the first valid one is used.
.PP
To set the paper size in the command line, add
.sp 1
.in +2m
.BI \-p \ desired_papersize
.in -2m
.sp 1
or
.sp 1
.in +2m
.BI \-\-papersize= desired_papersize
.in -2m
.sp 1
to the other
.B grolbp
options, where
.B desired_papersize
is in the same format as in the
.B DESC
file.
.PP
Paper sizes are case insensitive (i.e., `A4' is the same as `a4').
.PP
If no paper size is specified in the
.B DESC
file or the command line, a default size of A4 is used.
.TP
.SH CUSTOM PAPER SIZES
Custom defined paper sizes are in the form
.BI cust length x width
where
.I length
and
.I width
are the dimensions of the paper you want to to use, specified in printer
units (1/300 of an inch).
For instance, to print in a postcard sized paper which is two inches long
and four inches wide you can insert a line containing
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B papersize cust600x1200
.in -2m
.sp 1
at the beginning of the
.B DESC
file.
.SH PAGE ORIENTATION
As with the page size, the orientation of the printed page
.RB ( portrait
or
.BR landscape )
can be set in the
.B DESC
file or with command line options.
It is also case insensitive.
.PP
To set the orientation in the
.B DESC
file, insert a line with the following content:
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B orientation
.RB [ portrait | landscape ]
.in -2m
.sp 1
As with paper sizes, only the first valid orientation command in the
.B DESC
file is used.
.PP
To set the page orientation with command line options you can use the
.B \-o
or
.B \-\-orientation
option with the same parameters
.RB ( portrait
or
.BR landscape )
as in the
.B DESC
file.
Or you can use the
.B \-l
option to force the pages to be printed in landscape.
.SH FONT FILE FORMAT
In addition to the usual commands described in
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@),
.B grolbp
provides the command
.I lbpname
which sets the font name sent to the printer when requesting this font.
The syntax of this command is:
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B lbpname
.I printer_font_name
.in -2m
.IP \(bu
For bitmapped fonts,
.I printer_font_name
has the form
.sp 1
.in +2m
.RI N\(la base_fontname \(ra\(la font_style \(ra
.in -2m
.sp 1
.I base_fontname 
is the font name as it appears in the printers font listings without the
first letter, up to (but not including) the font size.
.I font_style
can be one of the letters
.BR R ,
.BR I ,
or
.BR B ,
indicating the font styles Roman, Italic and Bold respectively.
.IP
For instance, if the printer's 
.I font listing A
shows font `Nelite12I.ISO_USA', the corresponding entry in the font
description file is
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B lbpname NeliteI
.in -2m
.IP
Note that you may need to modify
.B grolbp
to add support for new bitmapped fonts, since the available font names and
font sizes of bitmapped fonts (as documented above) are hard-coded into the
program.
.IP \(bu
For scalable fonts,
.I printer_font_name
is identical to the font name as it appears in the printer's 
.IR "font listing A" .
.IP
For instance, to select the `Swiss' font in bold style, which appears in
the printer's
.I font listing A
as `Swiss-Bold', the required
.B lbpname
command line is
.sp 1
.in +2m
.B lbpname Swiss-Bold
.in -2m
.sp 1
.PP
The argument of
.B lbpname
is case sensitive.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B @FONTDIR@/devlbp/DESC
Device description file.
.TP
.BI @FONTDIR@/devlbp/ F
Font description file for font
.IR F .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff_out (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR groff_char (@MAN7EXT@)
.\"
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
