.\" Copyright 2012 The Kyua Authors.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\" * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" * Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors
.\"   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd September 9, 2012
.Dt KYUA-HELP 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "kyua help"
.Nd Shows usage information
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar command
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command provides interactive help on all supported commands and options.
If, for some reason, you happen to spot a discrepancy in the output of this
command and this document, the command is the authoritative source of
information.
.Pp
If no arguments are provided, the command prints the list of common options
and the list of supported subcommands.
.Pp
If the
.Ar command
argument is provided to, this single argument is the name of a valid
subcommand.
In that case,
.Nm
prints a textual description of the command, the list of common options and
the list of subcommand-specific options.
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The
.Nm
command always returns 0.
.Pp
Additional exit codes may be returned as described in
.Xr kyua 1 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1
