.\" Copyright 2012 The Kyua Authors.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\" * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" * Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors
.\"   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd May 20, 2015
.Dt KYUA-ABOUT 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm "kyua about"
.Nd Shows detailed authors, license, and version information
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Ar authors | license | version
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Sq about
command provides generic information about the
.Xr kyua 1
tool.
In the default synopsis form (no arguments), the information printed
includes:
.Bl -enum
.It
The name of the package, which is
.Sq kyua .
.It
The version number, which is
.Sq 0.13 .
.It
License information.
.It
Authors information.
.It
A link to the project web site.
.El
.Pp
You can customize the information printed by this command by specifying
the desired topic as the single argument to the command.
This can be one of:
.Bl -tag -width authorsXX
.It Ar authors
Displays the list of authors and contributors only.
.It Ar license
Displays the license information and the list of copyrights.
.It Ar version
Displays the package name and the version number in a format that is
compatible with the output of GNU tools that support a
.Fl -version
flag.
Use this whenever you have to query the version number of the package.
.El
.Sh FILES
The following files are read by the
.Nm
command:
.Bl -tag -width XX
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/kyua/AUTHORS
List of authors (aka copyright holders).
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/kyua/CONTRIBUTORS
List of contributors (aka individuals that have contributed to the project).
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/kyua/LICENSE
License information.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The
.Nm
command always returns 0.
.Pp
Additional exit codes may be returned as described in
.Xr kyua 1 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1
