.\" Copyright 2012 The Kyua Authors.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\" * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" * Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors
.\"   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd July 3, 2015
.Dt KYUAFILE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm Kyuafile
.Nd Test suite description files
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fn atf_test_program "string name" "[string metadata]"
.Fn current_kyuafile
.Fn fs.basename "string path"
.Fn fs.dirname "string path"
.Fn fs.exists "string path"
.Fn fs.files "string path"
.Fn fs.is_absolute "string path"
.Fn fs.join "string path" "string path"
.Fn include "string path"
.Fn plain_test_program "string name" "[string metadata]"
.Fn syntax "int version"
.Fn tap_test_program "string name" "[string metadata]"
.Fn test_suite "string name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A test suite is a collection of test programs and is represented by a
hierarchical layout of test binaries on the file system.
Any subtree of the file system can represent a test suite, provided that it
includes one or more
.Nm Ns s ,
which are the test suite definition files.
.Pp
A
.Nm
is a Lua script whose purpose is to describe the structure of the test
suite it belongs to.
To do so, the script has access to a collection of special functions provided
by
.Xr kyua 1
as described in
.Sx Helper functions .
.Ss File versioning
Every
.Nm
file starts with a call to
.Fn syntax "int version" .
This call determines the specific schema used by the file so that future
backwards-incompatible modifications to the file can be introduced.
.Pp
Any new
.Nm
file should set
.Fa version
to
.Sq 2 .
.Ss Test suite definition
If the
.Nm
registers any test programs,
the
.Nm
must define the name of the test suite the test programs belong to by using the
.Fn test_suite
function at the very beginning of the file.
.Pp
The test suite name provided in the
.Fn test_suite
call tells
.Xr kyua 1
which set of configuration variables from
.Xr kyua.conf 5
to pass to the test programs at run time.
.Ss Test program registration
A
.Nm
can register test programs by means of a variety of
.Fn *_test_program
functions, all of which take the name of a test program and a set of
optional metadata properties that describe such test program.
.Pp
The test programs to be registered must live in the current directory; in
other words, the various
.Fn *_test_program
calls cannot reference test programs in other directories.
The rationale for this is to force all
.Nm
files to be self-contained, and to simplify their internal representation.
.Pp
.Em ATF test programs
are those that use the
.Xr atf 7
libraries.
They can be registered with the
.Fn atf_test_program
table constructor.
This function takes the
.Fa name
of the test program and a collection of optional metadata settings for all
the test cases in the test program.
Any metadata properties defined by the test cases themselves override the
metadata values defined here.
.Pp
.Em Plain test programs
are those that return 0 on success and non-0 on failure; in general, most test
programs (even those that use fancy unit-testing libraries) behave this way and
thus also qualify as plain test programs.
They can be registered with the
.Fn plain_test_program
table constructor.
This function takes the
.Fa name
of the test program, an optional
.Fa test_suite
name that overrides the global test suite name, and a collection of optional
metadata settings for the test program.
.Pp
.Em TAP test programs
are those that implement the Test Anything Protocol.
They can be registered with the
.Fn tap_test_program
table constructor.
This function takes the
.Fa name
of the test program and a collection of optional metadata settings for the
test program.
.Pp
The following metadata properties can be passed to any test program definition:
.Bl -tag -width XX -offset indent
.It Va allowed_architectures
Whitespace-separated list of machine architecture names allowed by the test.
If empty or not defined, the test is allowed to run on any machine
architecture.
.It Va allowed_platforms
Whitespace-separated list of machine platform names allowed by the test.
If empty or not defined, the test is allowed to run on any machine
platform.
.It Va custom.NAME
Custom variable defined by the test where
.Sq NAME
denotes the name of the variable.
These variables are useful to tag your tests with information specific to
your project.
The values of such variables are propagated all the way from the tests to the
results files and later to any generated reports.
.Pp
Note that if the name happens to have dashes or any other special characters
in it, you will have to use a special Lua syntax to define the property.
Refer to the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section below for clarification.
.It Va description
Textual description of the test.
.It Va is_exclusive
If true, indicates that this test program cannot be executed along any other
programs at the same time.
Test programs that affect global system state, such as those that modify the
value of a
.Xr sysctl 8
setting, must set themselves as exclusive to prevent failures due to race
conditions.
Defaults to false.
.It Va required_configs
Whitespace-separated list of configuration variables that the test requires
to be defined before it can run.
.It Va required_disk_space
Amount of available disk space that the test needs to run successfully.
.It Va required_files
Whitespace-separated list of paths that the test requires to exist before
it can run.
.It Va required_memory
Amount of physical memory that the test needs to run successfully.
.It Va required_programs
Whitespace-separated list of basenames or absolute paths pointing to executable
binaries that the test requires to exist before it can run.
.It Va required_user
If empty, the test has no restrictions on the calling user for it to run.
If set to
.Sq unprivileged ,
the test needs to not run as root.
If set to
.Sq root ,
the test must run as root.
.It Va timeout
Amount of seconds that the test is allowed to execute before being killed.
.El
.Ss Recursion
To reference test programs in another subdirectory, a different
.Nm
must be created in that directory and it must be included into the original
.Nm
by means of the
.Fn include
function.
.Pp
.Fn include
may only be called with a relative path and with at most one directory
component.
This is by design: Kyua uses the file system structure as the layout of the
test suite definition.
Therefore, each subdirectory in a test suite must include its own
.Nm
and each
.Nm
can only descend into the
.Nm Ns s
of immediate subdirectories.
.Pp
If you need to source a
.Nm
located in disjoint parts of your file system namespace, you will have to
create a
.Sq shadow tree
using symbolic links and possibly helper
.Nm Ns s
to plug the various subdirectories together.
See the
.Sx EXAMPLES
section below for details.
.Pp
Note that each file is processed in its own Lua environment: there is no
mechanism to pass state from one file to the other.
The reason for this is that there is no such thing as a
.Dq top-level
.Nm
in a test suite: the user has to be able to run the test suite from any
directory in a given hierarchy, and this execution must not depend on files
that live in parent directories.
.Ss Top-level Kyuafile
Every system has a top directory into which test suites get installed.
The default is
.Pa /usr/tests .
Within this directory live test suites, each of which is in an independent
subdirectory.
Each subdirectory can be provided separately by independent third-party
packages.
.Pp
Kyua allows running all the installed test suites at once in order to
provide comprehensive cross-component reports.
In order to do this, there is a special file in the top directory that knows
how to inspect the subdirectories in search for other Kyuafiles and include
them.
.Pp
The
.Sx FILES
section includes more details on where this file lives.
.Ss Helper functions
The
.Sq base ,
.Sq string ,
and
.Sq table
Lua modules are fully available in the context of a
.Nm .
.Pp
The following extra functions are provided by Kyua:
.Bl -tag -width XX -offset indent
.It Ft string Fn current_kyuafile
Returns the absolute path to the current
.Nm .
.It Ft string Fn fs.basename "string path"
Returns the last component of the given path.
.It Ft string Fn fs.dirname "string path"
Returns the given path without its last component or a dot if the path has
a single component.
.It Ft bool Fn fs.exists "string path"
Checks if the given path exists.
If the path is not absolute, it is relative to the directory containing the
.Nm
in which the call to this function occurs.
.It Ft iterator Fn fs.files "string path"
Opens a directory for scanning of its entries.
The returned iterator yields an entry on each call, and the entry is simply
the filename.
If the path is not absolute, it is relative to the directory containing the
.Nm
in which the call to this function occurs.
.It Ft is_absolute Fn fs.is_absolute "string path"
Returns true if the given path is absolute; false otherwise.
.It Ft join Fn fs.join "string path" "string path"
Concatenates the two paths.
The second path cannot be absolute.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width XX
.It Pa /usr/tests/Kyuafile .
Top-level
.Nm
for the current system.
.It Pa /usr/share/examples/kyua/Kyuafile.top .
Sample file to serve as a top-level
.Nm .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following
.Nm
is the simplest you can define.
It provides a test suite definition and registers a couple of different test
programs using different interfaces:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
syntax(2)

test_suite('first')

atf_test_program{name='integration_test'}
plain_test_program{name='legacy_test'}
.Ed
.Pp
The following example is a bit more elaborate.
It introduces some metadata properties to the test program definitions and
recurses into a couple of subdirectories:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
syntax(2)

test_suite('second')

plain_test_program{name='legacy_test',
                   allowed_architectures='amd64 i386',
                   required_files='/bin/ls',
                   timeout=30}

tap_test_program{name='privileged_test',
                 required_user='root'}

include('module-1/Kyuafile')
include('module-2/Kyuafile')
.Ed
.Pp
The syntax to define custom properties may be not obvious if their names
have any characters that make the property name not be a valid Lua identifier.
Dashes are just one example.
To set such properties, do something like this:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
syntax(2)

test_suite('FreeBSD')

plain_test_program{name='the_test',
                   ['custom.FreeBSD-Bug-Id']='category/12345'}
.Ed
.Ss Connecting disjoint test suites
Now suppose you had various test suites on your file system and you would
like to connect them together so that they could be executed and treated as
a single unit.
The test suites we would like to connect live under
.Pa /usr/tests ,
.Pa /usr/local/tests
and
.Pa ~/local/tests .
.Pp
We cannot create a
.Nm
that references these because the
.Fn include
directive does not support absolute paths.
Instead, what we can do is create a shadow tree using symbolic links:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ mkdir ~/everything
$ ln -s /usr/tests ~/everything/system-tests
$ ln -s /usr/local/tests ~/everything/local-tests
$ ln -s ~/local/tests ~/everything/home-tests
.Ed
.Pp
And then we create an
.Pa ~/everything/Kyuafile
file to drive the execution of the integrated test suite:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
syntax(2)

test_suite('test-all-the-things')

include('system-tests/Kyuafile')
include('local-tests/Kyuafile')
include('home-tests/Kyuafile')
.Ed
.Pp
Or, simply, you could reuse the sample top-level
.Nm
to avoid having to manually craft the list of directories into which to
recurse:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ cp /usr/share/examples/kyua/Kyuafile.top ~/everything/Kyuafile
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1
