.\" Copyright 2012 The Kyua Authors.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are
.\" met:
.\"
.\" * Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" * Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" * Neither the name of Google Inc. nor the names of its contributors
.\"   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.Dd February 20, 2015
.Dt KYUA.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm kyua.conf
.Nd Configuration file for the kyua tool
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fn syntax "int version"
.Pp
Variables:
.Va architecture ,
.Va platform ,
.Va test_suites ,
.Va unprivileged_user .
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The configuration of Kyua is a simple collection of key/value pairs called
configuration variables.
There are configuration variables that have a special meaning to the runtime
engine implemented by
.Xr kyua 1 ,
and there are variables that only have meaning in the context of particular
test suites.
.Pp
Configuration files are Lua scripts.
In their most basic form, their whole purpose is to assign values to
variables, but the user has the freedom to implement any logic he desires
to compute such values.
.Ss File versioning
Every
.Nm
file starts with a call to
.Fn syntax "int version" .
This call determines the specific schema used by the file so that future
backwards-incompatible modifications to the file can be introduced.
.Pp
Any new
.Nm
file should set
.Fa version
to
.Sq 2 .
.Ss Runtime configuration variables
The following variables are internally recognized by
.Xr kyua 1 :
.Bl -tag -width XX -offset indent
.It Va architecture
Name of the system architecture (aka processor type).
.It Va parallelism
Maximum number of test cases to execute concurrently.
.It Va platform
Name of the system platform (aka machine type).
.It Va unprivileged_user
Name or UID of the unprivileged user.
.Pp
If set, the given user must exist in the system and his privileges will be
used to run test cases that need regular privileges when
.Xr kyua 1
is executed as root.
.El
.Ss Test-suite configuration variables
Each test suite is able to recognize arbitrary configuration variables, and
their type and meaning is specific to the test suite.
Because the existence and naming of these variables depends on every test
suite, this manual page cannot detail them; please refer to the documentation
of the test suite you are working with for more details on this topic.
.Pp
Test-suite specific configuration variables are defined inside the
.Va test_suites
dictionary.
The general syntax is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
test_suites.<test_suite_name>.<variable_name> = <value>
.Ed
.Pp
where
.Va test_suite_name
is the name of the test suite,
.Va variable_name
is the name of the variable to set, and
.Va value
is a value.
The value can be a string, an integer or a boolean.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width XX
.It /usr/share/examples/kyua/kyua.conf
Sample configuration file.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following
.Nm
shows a simple configuration file that overrides a bunch of the built-in
.Xr kyua 1
configuration variables:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
syntax(2)

architecture = 'x86_64'
platform = 'amd64'
.Ed
.Pp
The following is a more complex example that introduces the definition of
per-test suite configuration variables:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
syntax(2)

-- Assign built-in variables.
unprivileged_user = '_tests'

-- Assign test-suite variables.  All of these must be strings.
test_suites.NetBSD.file_systems = 'ffs ext2fs'
test_suites.X11.graphics_driver = 'vesa'
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kyua 1
