.TH cpudists 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
cpudists \- CPU distrib. by Kernel/Idle/Process. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cpudists
[\-ahV] [\-t top] [interval [count]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
cpudists prints the CPU time distributions consumed by the Kernel, 
Idle threads and by Processes. 

This program is a variant on cputimes, and creates extra kernel load as
described in cputimes(1M). cpudists prints out a distribution report
(a quantize aggregation), such that the number of occurrences and 
duration of each thread using the CPUs can be identified. 

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
stable - needs the sysinfo and sched providers.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-a
print all processes
.TP
\-T
print totals
.TP
\-V
don't print timestamps
.TP
\-t num
print top num lines only
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default, print Kernel/Idle/Process time, 1 x 1 second sample,
# 
.B cpudists
.PP
.TP
Print every 1 second,
# 
.B cpudists
1
.PP
.TP
Print all processes every 10 seconds,
#
.B cpudists
\-a 10
.PP
.TP
Print top 8 lines every 5 seconds,
#
.B cpudists
\-at 8 5
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
IDLE
Idle time - CPU running idle thread
.TP
KERNEL
Kernel time - Kernel servicing interrupts, ...
.TP
PROCESS
Process time - PIDs running on the system
.TP
value
Time in nanoseconds
.TP
count
Number of occurrences that were at least this duration (ns)
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
cpudists will run once, unless a count is specified.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M), vmstat(1M)

