.TH cputimes 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
cputimes \- print time by Kernel/Idle/Process. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cputimes
[\-ahTV] [\-t top] [interval [count]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
cputimes prints the CPU time consumed by the Kernel, Idle threads and
by Processes. 

This program accurately measures time consumed by the kernel, but in
doing so creates extra kernel load of it's own. This extra kernel
activity can be measured by running one cputimes and then another, and
comparing the difference in kernel consumed time. This method can be
used to estimate the load caused by other DTrace scripts.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
stable - needs the sysinfo and sched providers.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-a
print all processes
.TP
\-T
print totals
.TP
\-V
don't print timestamps
.TP
\-t num
print top num lines only
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default, print Kernel/Idle/Process time, 1 x 1 second sample,
# 
.B cputimes
.PP
.TP
Print every 1 second,
# 
.B cputimes
1
.PP
.TP
Print all processes every 10 seconds,
#
.B cputimes
\-a 10
.PP
.TP
Print top 8 lines every 5 seconds,
#
.B cputimes
\-at 8 5
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
THREADS
Either KERNEL, IDLE, PROCESS or process name.
.TP
IDLE
Idle time - CPU running idle thread
.TP
KERNEL
Kernel time - Kernel servicing interrupts, ...
.TP
PROCESS
Process time - PIDs running on the system
.TP
TIME (ns)
Sum of the CPU time, ns (nanoseconds)
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
cputimes will run once, unless a count is specified.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M), vmstat(1M)

