.TH j_profile.d 1m   "$Date:: 2007-10-03 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
j_profile.d - sample stack traces with Java translations using DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.SH DESCRIPTION
This samples stack traces for the process specified. This stack trace
will cross the JVM and system libraries, and insert translations for Java
stack frames where appropriate. This is best explained with an example
stack frame output,

Func_loop.func_c()V
Func_loop.func_b()V
Func_loop.func_a()V
Func_loop.main([Ljava/lang/String;)V
StubRoutines (1)
libjvm.so`__1cJJavaCallsLcall_helper6FpnJJavaValue_pnMmethodHan
libjvm.so`__1cCosUos_exception_wrapper6FpFpnJJavaValue_pnMmetho
libjvm.so`__1cJJavaCallsEcall6FpnJJavaValue_nMmethodHandle_pnRJ
libjvm.so`__1cRjni_invoke_static6FpnHJNIEnv__pnJJavaValue_pnI_j
libjvm.so`jni_CallStaticVoidMethod+0x15d
java`JavaMain+0xd30
libc.so.1`_thr_setup+0x52
libc.so.1`_lwp_start
101

The lines at the top are Java frames, followed by the JVM (libjvm.so).
The JVM symbols may be translated by passing the output through c++filt.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
Evolving - uses the DTrace hotspot provider, which may change 
as additional features are introduced. Check Java/Readme
to see what version these scripts are based on.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output,
# 
.B j_profile.d
.PP
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Examples, Notes and Docs directories. The example files may be
especially useful as they aim to demonstrate how to interpret
the output.
.SH EXIT
j_profile.d will run until Ctrl-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[CA, USA]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)
