.TH xvmstat 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
xvmstat \- extended vmstat demo in DTrace. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xvmstat
[interval [count]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This has been written to demonstrate fetching similar data as vmstat
from DTrace, with a few extra fields.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
unstable - needs various kernel symbols.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Print virtual memory statistics every second,
# 
.B xvmstat
.TP
Print every 5 seconds, 6 times,
#
.B xvmstat
5 6
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
w
swapped out LWPs, number
.TP
swap
virtual memory free, Mb
.TP
free
free RAM, Mb
.TP
re
page reclaims, pages
.TP
maj
major faults, pages
.TP
mf
minor faults, pages
.TP
cow
copy-on-write faults, pages
.TP
pro
protection faults, pages
sr
scan rate, pages
.TP
epi
executable page ins, pages
.TP
epo
executable page outs, pages
.TP
epf
executable frees, pages
.TP
api
anonymous page ins, pages
.TP
apo
anonymous page outs, pages
.TP
apf
anonymous frees, pages
.TP
fpi
filesystem page ins, pages
.TP
fpo
filesystem page outs, pages
.TP
fpf
filesystem frees, pages
.PP
.SH NOTES
Most of the statistics are in units of pages, unlike the
original vmstat command which sometimes uses kilobytes.

All page values are per second values.

As this program does not use Kstat, there is no summary since boot line.

Free RAM is both free free + cache free.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
xvmstat will run until Ctrl\-C is hit, or until the count argument
has been satisfied.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
vmstat(1M), dtrace(1M)
