@c $FreeBSD$

@node States
@section States of Problem Reports

@cindex life-cycle of a Problem Report
@cindex states of Problem Reports
@cindex Problem Report states
@cindex automatic notification

Each PR goes through a defined series of states between origination and
closure.  The originator of a PR receives notification automatically of
any state changes.

Unless your site has customized states (see @pxref{states
file,,,gnats}), @sc{gnats} uses these states:

@table @dfn
@cindex @emph{open} state
@cindex initial state (@dfn{open})
@cindex state---@dfn{open}
@item open
The initial state of a Problem Report.  This means the PR has been filed
and the responsible person(s) notified.

@cindex @emph{analyzed} state
@cindex state---@dfn{analyzed}
@item analyzed
The responsible person has analyzed the problem.  The analysis should
contain a preliminary evaluation of the problem and an estimate of the
amount of time and resources necessary to solve the problem.  It should
also suggest possible workarounds.

@cindex @emph{feedback} state
@cindex state---@dfn{feedback}
@item feedback
The problem has been solved, and the originator has been given a patch
or other fix.  The PR remains in this state until the originator
acknowledges that the solution works.

@cindex @emph{closed} state
@cindex state---@dfn{closed}
@cindex final state (@dfn{closed})
@item closed
A Problem Report is closed (``the bug stops here'') only when any
changes have been integrated, documented, and tested, and the submitter
has confirmed the solution.

@cindex @emph{suspended} state
@cindex state---@dfn{suspended}
@item suspended
Work on the problem has been postponed.  This happens if a timely
solution is not possible or is not cost-effective at the present time.
The PR continues to exist, though a solution is not being actively
sought.  If the problem cannot be solved at all, it should be closed
rather than suspended.
@end table

