MANIFEST for byacc, version t20240109
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MANIFEST                        this file
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                original version of byacc - 1993
AUTHORS                         nicknames for some contributors (see CHANGES for details)
CHANGES                         generated changelog
LICENSE                         summary of byacc's license
Makefile.old                    renamed from Makefile
NEW_FEATURES                    original version of byacc - 1993
NOTES                           original version of byacc - 1993
NO_WARRANTY                     original version of byacc - 1993
README                          original version of byacc - 1993
README.BTYACC                   byacc-btyacc-20140323
VERSION                         patch-level
aclocal.m4                      macros for configure-script
btyaccpar.c                     generated from btyaccpar.skel
btyaccpar.skel                  bytacc's parser skeleton (renamed from yaccpar.skel)
closure.c                       original version of byacc - 1993
config.guess                    configure-script utility
config.sub                      configure-script utility
config_h.in                     template for config.h
configure                       snapshot 2004/3/28
configure.in                    template for configure-script
defs.h                          original version of byacc - 1993
descrip.mms                     build-script for VMS
error.c                         original version of byacc - 1993
graph.c                         write the file y.dot in graphviz format
install-sh                      install-script
lalr.c                          original version of byacc - 1993
lr0.c                           original version of byacc - 1993
main.c                          original version of byacc - 1993
makefile.in                     template for makefile
mkpar.c                         original version of byacc - 1993
mstring.c                       string-utilities
output.c                        original version of byacc - 1993
reader.c                        original version of byacc - 1993
skel2c                          awk script to transform yaccpar.skel into skeleton.c
symtab.c                        original version of byacc - 1993
verbose.c                       original version of byacc - 1993
vmsbuild.com                    build-script for VMS
warshall.c                      original version of byacc - 1993
yacc.1                          original version of byacc - 1993
yaccpar.c                       generated from yaccpar.skel
yaccpar.skel                    data which can be transformed into skeleton.c
package                         subdirectory
package/byacc.spec              RPM file for byacc
package/debian                  subdirectory
package/debian/byacc2.docs      extra docs for byacc2 package
package/debian/byacc2.postinst  post-install script for byacc2 package
package/debian/byacc2.prerm     pre-removal script for byacc2 package
package/debian/changelog        scripts from Debian package
package/debian/control          scripts from Debian package
package/debian/copyright        scripts from Debian package
package/debian/rules            scripts from Debian package
package/debian/source           subdirectory
package/debian/source/format    scripts from Debian package
package/debian                  subdirectory
package/debian/watch            scripts from Debian package
package                         subdirectory
package/mingw-byacc.spec        mingw spec-file, for cross-compiles
package/pkgsrc                  subdirectory
package/pkgsrc/DESCR            scripts from NetBSD pkgsrc, for test-builds
package/pkgsrc/Makefile         scripts from NetBSD pkgsrc, for test-builds
package/pkgsrc/PLIST            scripts from NetBSD pkgsrc, for test-builds
package/pkgsrc/distinfo         scripts from NetBSD pkgsrc, for test-builds
test                            subdirectory
test/README                     summary of "test" directory
test/btyacc                     subdirectory
test/btyacc/big_b.error         exercise -L/-B options
test/btyacc/big_b.output        exercise -L/-B options
test/btyacc/big_l.error         exercise -L/-B options
test/btyacc/big_l.output        exercise -L/-B options
test/btyacc/btyacc_calc1.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_calc1.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_calc1.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_calc1.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_demo.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_demo.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_demo.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_demo.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy1.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy1.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy1.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy1.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy2.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy2.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy2.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy2.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy3.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy3.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy3.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/btyacc_destroy3.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc.error          reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc.output         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc.tab.c          reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc.tab.h          reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc1.error         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc1.output        reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc1.tab.c         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc1.tab.h         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc2.error         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc2.output        reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc2.tab.c         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc2.tab.h         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc3.error         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc3.output        reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc3.tab.c         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc3.tab.h         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_all.error reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_all.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_all.tab.c reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_all.tab.h reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_default.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_default.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_default.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_default.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_imports.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_imports.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_imports.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_imports.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_provides.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_provides.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_provides.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_provides.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_requires.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_requires.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_requires.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_requires.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_top.error reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_top.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_top.tab.c reference output for testing
test/btyacc/calc_code_top.tab.h reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_calc.code.c    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_calc.error     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_calc.output    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_calc.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_calc.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_error.code.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_error.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_error.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_error.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/code_error.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines1.calc.c     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines1.calc.h     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines1.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines1.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines2.calc.c     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines2.calc.h     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines2.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines2.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines3.calc.c     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines3.calc.h     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines3.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/defines3.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/empty.error         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/empty.output        reference output for testing
test/btyacc/empty.tab.c         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/empty.tab.h         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit1.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit1.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit1.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit1.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit2.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit2.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit2.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit2.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit3.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit3.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit3.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit3.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit4.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit4.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit4.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit4.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit5.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit5.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit5.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_inherit5.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax1.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax1.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax1.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax1.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax10.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax10.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax10.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax10.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax11.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax11.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax11.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax11.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax12.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax12.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax12.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax12.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax13.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax13.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax13.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax13.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax14.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax14.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax14.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax14.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax15.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax15.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax15.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax15.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax16.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax16.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax16.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax16.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax17.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax17.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax17.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax17.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax18.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax18.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax18.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax18.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax19.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax19.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax19.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax19.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax2.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax2.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax2.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax2.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax20.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax20.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax20.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax20.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax21.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax21.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax21.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax21.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax22.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax22.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax22.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax22.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax23.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax23.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax23.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax23.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax24.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax24.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax24.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax24.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax25.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax25.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax25.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax25.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax26.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax26.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax26.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax26.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax27.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax27.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax27.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax27.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax3.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax3.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax3.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax3.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax4.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax4.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax4.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax4.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax5.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax5.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax5.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax5.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax6.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax6.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax6.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax6.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7a.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7a.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7a.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7a.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7b.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7b.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7b.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax7b.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8a.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8a.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8a.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax8a.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax9.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax9.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax9.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/err_syntax9.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/error.error         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/error.output        reference output for testing
test/btyacc/error.tab.c         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/error.tab.h         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/expr.oxout.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/expr.oxout.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/expr.oxout.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/expr.oxout.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/grammar.dot         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/grammar.error       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/grammar.output      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/grammar.tab.c       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/grammar.tab.h       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/help.error          reference output for testing
test/btyacc/help.output         reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit0.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit0.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit0.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit0.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit1.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit1.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit1.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit1.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit2.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit2.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit2.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/inherit2.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_b_opt.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_b_opt.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_b_opt1.error     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_b_opt1.output    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_code_c.error     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_code_c.output    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_defines.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_defines.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_graph.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_graph.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_include.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_include.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_opts.error       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_opts.output      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_output.error     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_output.output    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_output1.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_output1.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_output2.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_output2.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_p_opt.error      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_p_opt.output     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_p_opt1.error     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_p_opt1.output    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_verbose.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/no_verbose.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/nostdin.error       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/nostdin.output      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/ok_syntax1.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/ok_syntax1.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/ok_syntax1.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/ok_syntax1.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_calc.error     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_calc.output    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_calc.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_calc.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_error.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_error.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_error.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/pure_error.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc-s.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc-s.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc-s.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc-s.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc.error    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc.output   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2-s.error reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2-s.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2-s.tab.c reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2-s.tab.h reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc2.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3-s.error reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3-s.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3-s.tab.c reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3-s.tab.h reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc3.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4-s.error reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4-s.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4-s.tab.c reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4-s.tab.h reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4.error   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/quote_calc4.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/btyacc/rename_debug.c      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/rename_debug.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/rename_debug.h      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/rename_debug.i      reference output for testing
test/btyacc/rename_debug.output reference output for testing
test/btyacc/stdin1.calc.c       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/stdin1.error        reference output for testing
test/btyacc/stdin1.output       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/stdin2.calc.c       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/stdin2.error        reference output for testing
test/btyacc/stdin2.output       reference output for testing
test/btyacc/varsyntax_calc1.error  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/varsyntax_calc1.output  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/varsyntax_calc1.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/btyacc/varsyntax_calc1.tab.h  reference output for testing
test                            subdirectory
test/btyacc_calc1.y             testcase for btyacc
test/btyacc_demo.y              testcase for btyacc
test/btyacc_destroy1.y          btyacc test-case for %parse-param
test/btyacc_destroy2.y          btyacc test-case for %parse-param
test/btyacc_destroy3.y          btyacc test-case for %parse-param
test/calc.y                     example from VMS freeware version of byacc
test/calc1.y                    advanced example from Steve Johnson's paper.
test/calc2.y                    test-cases and reference files for %lex-param / %parse-param
test/calc3.y                    test-cases and reference files for %lex-param / %parse-param
test/calc_code_all.y            test-case for "%code" with all recognized keywords
test/calc_code_default.y        test-case for "%code" with no keyword
test/calc_code_imports.y        test-case for "%code imports"
test/calc_code_provides.y       test-case for "%code provides"
test/calc_code_requires.y       test-case for "%code requires"
test/calc_code_top.y            test-case for "%code top"
test/code_calc.y                reference input for testing
test/code_debug.y               test-input, for -i, -o, -d options
test/code_error.y               reference input for testing
test/empty.y                    testcase for btyacc
test/err_inherit1.y             testcase for btyacc
test/err_inherit2.y             testcase for btyacc
test/err_inherit3.y             testcase for btyacc
test/err_inherit4.y             testcase for btyacc
test/err_inherit5.y             testcase for btyacc
test/err_syntax1.y              test-case with syntax error (and nonprinting character)
test/err_syntax10.y             testcase for retyped_warning()
test/err_syntax11.y             testcase for reprec_warning()
test/err_syntax12.y             testcase for revalued_warning()
test/err_syntax13.y             testcase for terminal_start()
test/err_syntax14.y             testcase for restarted_warning() and undefined_goal()
test/err_syntax15.y             testcase for no_grammar()
test/err_syntax16.y             testcase for terminal_lhs()
test/err_syntax17.y             testcase for unterminated_action()
test/err_syntax18.y             testcase for dollar_warning()
test/err_syntax19.y             testcase for dollar_error()
test/err_syntax2.y              testcase for unterminated_comment()
test/err_syntax20.y             testcase for undefined_symbol_warning()
test/err_syntax21.y             testcase for unknown_rhs()
test/err_syntax22.y             testcase for untyped_rhs()
test/err_syntax23.y             testcase for untyped_lhs()
test/err_syntax24.y             testcase for default_action_warning()
test/err_syntax25.y             testcase for over_unionized()
test/err_syntax26.y             testcase for unexpected_EOF()
test/err_syntax27.y             testcase for missing_brace()
test/err_syntax3.y              testcase for unterminated_string()
test/err_syntax4.y              testcase for unterminated_text()
test/err_syntax5.y              testcase for unterminated_union()
test/err_syntax6.y              testcase for illegal_tag()
test/err_syntax7.y              testcase for illegal_character()
test/err_syntax7a.y             testcase for illegal_character()
test/err_syntax7b.y             testcase for illegal_character()
test/err_syntax8.y              testcase for used_reserved()
test/err_syntax8a.y             testcase for used_reserved()
test/err_syntax9.y              testcase for tokenized_start()
test/error.y                    original version of byacc - 1993
test/expr.oxout.h               stub for "run_make.sh"
test/expr.oxout.y               test-case for "#line" feature
test/grammar.y                  grammar from cproto
test/inherit0.y                 testcase for btyacc
test/inherit1.y                 testcase for btyacc
test/inherit2.y                 testcase for btyacc
test/ok_syntax1.y               testcase for valid literal syntax
test/pure_calc.y                reference input for testing
test/pure_error.y               reference input for testing
test/quote_calc.y               test-case for %token using quoted name
test/quote_calc2.y              test-case for %token using quoted name
test/quote_calc3.y              test-case for %token using quoted name
test/quote_calc4.y              test-case for %token using quoted name
test/run_lint.sh                run lint, using the build-directory's makefile, on each ".c" file in test-directory
test/run_make.sh                do a test-compile of each ".c" file in the test-directory
test/run_test.sh                test-script for byacc
test/varsyntax_calc1.y          testcase for btyacc
test/yacc                       subdirectory
test/yacc/big_b.error           exercise -L/-B options
test/yacc/big_b.output          exercise -L/-B options
test/yacc/big_l.error           exercise -L/-B options
test/yacc/big_l.output          exercise -L/-B options
test/yacc/calc.error            reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc.output           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc.tab.c            reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc.tab.h            reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc1.error           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc1.output          reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc1.tab.c           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc1.tab.h           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc2.error           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc2.output          reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc2.tab.c           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc2.tab.h           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc3.error           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc3.output          reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc3.tab.c           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc3.tab.h           reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_all.error   reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_all.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_all.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_all.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_default.error  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_default.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_default.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_default.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_imports.error  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_imports.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_imports.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_imports.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_provides.error  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_provides.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_provides.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_provides.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_requires.error  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_requires.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_requires.tab.c  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_requires.tab.h  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_top.error   reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_top.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_top.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/yacc/calc_code_top.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_calc.code.c      reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_calc.error       reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_calc.output      reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_calc.tab.c       reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_calc.tab.h       reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_error.code.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_error.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_error.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_error.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/yacc/code_error.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines1.calc.c       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines1.calc.h       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines1.error        reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines1.output       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines2.calc.c       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines2.calc.h       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines2.error        reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines2.output       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines3.calc.c       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines3.calc.h       reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines3.error        reference output for testing
test/yacc/defines3.output       reference output for testing
test/yacc/empty.error           reference output for testing
test/yacc/empty.output          reference output for testing
test/yacc/empty.tab.c           reference output for testing
test/yacc/empty.tab.h           reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax1.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax1.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax1.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax1.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax10.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax10.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax10.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax10.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax11.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax11.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax11.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax11.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax12.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax12.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax12.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax12.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax13.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax13.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax13.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax13.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax14.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax14.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax14.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax14.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax15.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax15.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax15.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax15.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax16.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax16.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax16.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax16.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax17.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax17.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax17.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax17.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax18.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax18.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax18.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax18.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax19.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax19.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax19.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax19.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax2.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax2.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax2.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax2.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax20.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax20.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax20.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax20.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax21.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax21.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax21.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax21.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax22.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax22.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax22.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax22.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax23.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax23.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax23.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax23.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax24.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax24.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax24.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax24.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax25.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax25.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax25.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax25.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax26.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax26.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax26.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax26.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax27.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax27.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax27.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax27.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax3.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax3.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax3.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax3.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax4.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax4.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax4.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax4.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax5.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax5.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax5.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax5.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax6.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax6.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax6.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax6.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7a.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7a.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7a.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7a.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7b.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7b.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7b.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax7b.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8a.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8a.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8a.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax8a.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax9.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax9.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax9.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/err_syntax9.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/error.error           reference output for testing
test/yacc/error.output          reference output for testing
test/yacc/error.tab.c           reference output for testing
test/yacc/error.tab.h           reference output for testing
test/yacc/expr.oxout.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/expr.oxout.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/expr.oxout.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/yacc/expr.oxout.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/yacc/grammar.dot           reference output for testing
test/yacc/grammar.error         reference output for testing
test/yacc/grammar.output        reference output for testing
test/yacc/grammar.tab.c         reference output for testing
test/yacc/grammar.tab.h         reference output for testing
test/yacc/help.error            reference output for testing
test/yacc/help.output           reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_b_opt.error        reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_b_opt.output       reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_b_opt1.error       reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_b_opt1.output      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_code_c.error       reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_code_c.output      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_defines.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_defines.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_graph.error        reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_graph.output       reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_include.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_include.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_opts.error         reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_opts.output        reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_output.error       reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_output.output      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_output1.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_output1.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_output2.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_output2.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_p_opt.error        reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_p_opt.output       reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_p_opt1.error       reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_p_opt1.output      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_verbose.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/no_verbose.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/nostdin.error         reference output for testing
test/yacc/nostdin.output        reference output for testing
test/yacc/ok_syntax1.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/ok_syntax1.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/ok_syntax1.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/yacc/ok_syntax1.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_calc.error       reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_calc.output      reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_calc.tab.c       reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_calc.tab.h       reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_error.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_error.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_error.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/yacc/pure_error.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc-s.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc-s.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc-s.tab.c    reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc-s.tab.h    reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc.error      reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc.output     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc.tab.c      reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc.tab.h      reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2-s.error   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2-s.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2-s.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2-s.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc2.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3-s.error   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3-s.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3-s.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3-s.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc3.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4-s.error   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4-s.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4-s.tab.c   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4-s.tab.h   reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4.error     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4.output    reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4.tab.c     reference output for testing
test/yacc/quote_calc4.tab.h     reference output for testing
test/yacc/rename_debug.c        reference output for testing
test/yacc/rename_debug.error    reference output for testing
test/yacc/rename_debug.h        reference output for testing
test/yacc/rename_debug.i        reference output for testing
test/yacc/rename_debug.output   reference output for testing
test/yacc/stdin1.calc.c         reference output for testing
test/yacc/stdin1.error          reference output for testing
test/yacc/stdin1.output         reference output for testing
test/yacc/stdin2.calc.c         reference output for testing
test/yacc/stdin2.error          reference output for testing
test/yacc/stdin2.output         reference output for testing
test/yacc/varsyntax_calc1.error reference output for testing
test/yacc/varsyntax_calc1.output  reference output for testing
test/yacc/varsyntax_calc1.tab.c reference output for testing
test/yacc/varsyntax_calc1.tab.h reference output for testing
