.\" Copyright (c) 2017 Steven G. Kargl <kargl@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 1, 2017
.Dt COSPI 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cospi ,
.Nm cospif ,
.Nm cospil
.Nd half\(encycle cosine functions
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libm
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In math.h
.Ft double
.Fn cospi "double x"
.Ft float
.Fn cospif "float x"
.Ft long double
.Fn cospil "long double x"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn cospi ,
.Fn cospif ,
and
.Fn cospil
functions compute the cosine of
.Fa "\(*p \(mu x" .
and measure angles in half-cycles.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn cospi ,
.Fn cospif ,
and
.Fn cospil
functions returns
.Fn cos "\(*p \(mu x" .
If \*(Bax\*(Ba \*(Ge 2^(p - 1)
where p is the floating\(enpoint precision of
.Ar x ,
then the returned value is 1 and it has no significance.
.Sh SPECIAL VALUES
.Bl -tag
.It
.Fn cospi \*(Pm0
returns 1.
.It
.Fn cospi \*(Pmn/2
returns 0 for positive integers
.Ar n .
.It
.Fn cospi n
returns 1 for even integers
.Ar n .
.It
.Fn cospi n
returns \-1 for odd integers
.Ar n .
.It
.Fn cospi \*(Pm\(if
return an \*(Na and raises an FE_INVALID exception.
.It
.Fn cospi \*(Na
return an \*(Na and raises an FE_INVALID exception.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cos 3 ,
.Xr fenv 3 ,
.Xr math 3 ,
.Xr sin 3 ,
.Xr sinpi 3 ,
.Xr tan 3 ,
.Xr tanpi 3
.Sh AUTHORS
The half\(encycle trignometric functions were written by
.An Steven G. Kargl Aq Mt kargl@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh STANDARDS
These functions conform to
IEEE Std 754\(tm\(en2008 ,
\(dqIEEE Standard for Floating-Point Arithmetic\(dq
and to
ISO/IEC TS 18661-4 ,
\(dqInformation technology \(em Programming languages, their environments,
and system software interfaces \(em Floating\(enpoint extensions for
C\(dq \(em Part 4: Supplementary functions.


