.\" Copyright (c) 1985, 1991 Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     from: @(#)ieee.3	6.4 (Berkeley) 5/6/91
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 25, 1994
.Dt IEEE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm copysign ,
.Nm copysignf ,
.Nm finite ,
.Nm finitef ,
.Nm ilogb ,
.Nm ilogbf ,
.Nm nextafter ,
.Nm nextafterf ,
.Nm remainder ,
.Nm remainderf ,
.Nm scalbn ,
.Nm scalbnf
.Nd functions for IEEE arithmetic
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <math.h>
.Ft double 
.Fn copysign "double x" "double y"
.Ft float 
.Fn copysignf "float x" "float y"
.Ft int 
.Fn finite "double x"
.Ft int 
.Fn finitef "float x"
.Ft int
.Fn ilogb "double x"
.Ft int
.Fn ilogbf "float x"
.Ft double 
.Fn nextafter "double x" "double y"
.Ft float
.Fn nextafterf "float x" "float y"
.Ft double
.Fn remainder "double x" "double y"
.Ft float
.Fn remainderf "float x" "float y"
.Ft double 
.Fn scalbn "double x" "int n"
.Ft float 
.Fn scalbnf "float x" "int n"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions are required or recommended by 
.St -ieee754 .
.Pp
.Fn copysign
and
.Fn copysignf
return
.Fa x
with its sign changed to
.Fa y Ns 's .
.Pp
.Fn finite
and
.Fn finitef
return the value 1 just when
\-\*(If \*(Lt
.Fa x
\*(Lt +\*(If;
otherwise a
zero is returned
(when
.Pf \\*(Ba Ns Fa x Ns \\*(Ba
= \*(If or
.Fa x
is \*(Na
.Pp
.Fn ilogb
and
.Fn ilogbf
return
.Fa x Ns 's exponent
.Fa n ,
in integer format.
.Fn ilogb \*(Pm\*(If 
returns 
.Dv INT_MAX
and
.Fn ilogb 0
returns 
.Dv INT_MIN .
.Pp
.Fn nextafter 
and
.Fn nextafterf
return the next machine representable number from 
.Fa x
in direction
.Fa y .
.Pp
.Fn remainder
and
.Fn remainderf
return the remainder
.Fa r
:=
.Fa x
\-
.Fa n\(**y
where
.Fa n
is the integer nearest the exact value of
.Bk -words
.Fa x Ns / Ns Fa y ;
.Ek
moreover if
.Pf \\*(Ba Fa n
\-
.Sm off
.Fa x No / Fa y No \\*(Ba
.Sm on
=
1/2
then
.Fa n
is even.  Consequently
the remainder is computed exactly and
.Sm off
.Pf \\*(Ba Fa r No \\*(Ba
.Sm on
\*(Le
.Sm off
.Pf \\*(Ba Fa y No \\*(Ba/2 .
.Sm on
But
.Fn remainder x 0
and
.Fn remainder \*(If 0
are invalid operations that produce a \*(Na.
.Pp
.Fn scalbn
and
.Fn scalbnf
return
.Fa x Ns \(**(2** Ns Fa n )
computed by exponent manipulation.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr math 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ieee
functions appeared in 
.Bx 4.3 .
.Sh STANDARDS
.St -ieee754
