.TH GROFF_WWW @MAN7EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005
.\" Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"      Written by Gaius Mulley (gaius@glam.ac.uk)
.\"
.\" This file is part of groff.
.\"
.\" groff is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under
.\" the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
.\" Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any later
.\" version.
.\"
.\" groff is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY
.\" WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
.\" FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
.\" for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
.\" with groff; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to the Free Software
.\" Foundation, 51 Franklin St - Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA.
.\"
.\" user level guide to using the -mwww macroset
.\"
.
.do nr groff_www_C \n[.C]
.cp 0
.
.do mso www.tmac
.
.\" we need the .LK here as we use it in the middle as an example --
.\" once the user requests .LK then the automatic generation of links
.\" at the top of the document is suppressed.
.LK
.
.
.SH NAME
groff_www \- groff macros for authoring web pages
.HR
.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B "groff \-mwww"
[ options ]
file ...
.
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page describes the GNU \-mwww macro package, which is part of
the groff document formatting system.
The manual page is very a basic guide, and the html device driver
.RB ( \%grohtml )
has been completely rewritten but still remains as in an alpha state.
It has been included into the distribution so that a lot of people have a
chance to test it.
Note that this macro file will be automatically called (via the
.B troffrc
file) if you use
.BR \-Thtml .
.PP
To see the hyperlinks in action, please format this man page with the
.B \%grohtml
device.
.PP
Here is a summary of the functions found in this macro set.
.ta 2iL
.nf
\&.JOBNAME	split output into multiple files
\&.HX	automatic heading level cut off;
	$1 point for sections/headers
\&.BCL	specify colours on a web page
\&.BGIMG	specify background image
\&.URL	create a url using two parameters
\&.FTP	create an ftp reference
\&.MTO	create a html email address
\&.FTP	create an ftp reference
\&.TAG	generate an html name
\&.IMG	include an image file
\&.PIMG	include png image
\&.MPIMG	place png on the margin and
	wrap text around it
\&.HnS	begin heading
\&.HnE	end heading
\&.LK	emit automatically collected links.
\&.HR	produce a horizontal rule
\&.NHR	suppress automatic generation of rules.
\&.HTL	only generate HTML title
\&.HEAD	add data to <head> block
\&.ULS	unorder list begin
\&.ULE	unorder list end
\&.OLS	ordered list begin
\&.OLE	ordered list end
\&.DLS	definition list begin
\&.DLE	definition list end
\&.LI	insert a list item
\&.DC	generate a drop capital
\&.HTML	pass an html raw request to the
	device driver
\&.CDS	code example begin
\&.CDE	code example end
.fi
.PP
Output of the
.BR pic ,
.BR eqn ,
.BR refer ,
and
.B tbl
preprocessors is acceptable as input.
.
.
.SH REQUESTS
.TP
.B .JOBNAME filename
Split output into multiple HTML files.
A file is split whenever a .SH or .NH\ 1 is encountered.
Its argument is the file stem name for future output files.
This option is equivalent to
.BR \%grohtml 's
.B \-j
option.
.TP
.B .HX n
Specify the cut off depth when generating links from section headings.
For example, a parameter of\~2 would cause
.B \%grohtml
to generate a list of links for
.B .NH\ 1
and
.B .NH\ 2
but not for
.BR .NH\ 3 .
Whereas
.RS
.IP
.nf
.B .HX 0
.fi
.RE
.IP
will tell
.B \%grohtml
that no heading links should be created at all.
Another method for turning automatic headings off is by issuing the
the command line switch
.B \-P\-l
to
.BR groff .
.
.TP
.B .BCL foreground background active not-visited visited
This macro takes five parameters: foreground, background, active hypertext
link, hypertext link not yet visited, and visited hypertext link colour.
.
.TP
.B .BGIMG imagefile
the only parameter to this macro is the background image file.
.
.TP
.B .URL url [description] [after]
generates
.TAG URL
a URL using either one, two or three arguments.
The first parameter is the actual URL, the second is the name of the link,
and the third is optional stuff to be printed immediately afterwards.
If
.B description
and
.B after
are absent then the
.B url
becomes the anchor text.
Hyphenation is disabled while printing the actual URL;
explicit breakpoints
should be inserted with the
.B \[rs]:
escape.
Here is how to encode
.URL http://\:foo.\:org/ "foo" :
.RS
.IP
.B .URL http://\[rs]:foo.\[rs]:org/ "foo" :
.RE
.IP
If this is processed by a device other than 
.B \-Thtml
it appears as:
.RS
.IP
\m[blue]foo\m[] \[la]\f[C]http://foo.org\f[]\[ra]:
.RE
.IP
The URL macro can be of any type; for example we can reference
.URL pic.html "Eric Raymond's pic guide" 
by:
.RS
.IP
.B .URL pic.html \[dq]Eric Raymond's pic guide\[dq]
.RE
.
.TP
.B .MTO address [description] [after]
Generate an email html reference.
The first argument is mandatory as the email address.
The optional second argument is the text you see in your browser
If an empty argument is given,
.B address
is used instead.
An optional third argument is stuff printed immediately afterwards.
Hyphenation is disabled while printing the actual email address.
For example, 
.MTO joe@user.org "Joe User"
was achieved by the following macro:
.RS
.IP
.B .MTO joe@user.org \[dq]Joe User\[dq]
.RE
.IP
Note that all the URLs actually are treated as consuming no textual space
in groff.
This could be considered as a bug since it causes some problems.
To circumvent this,
.B www.tmac
inserts a zero-width character which expands to a harmless space (only if
run with
.BR \-Thtml ).
.
.TP
.B .FTP url [description] [after]
indicates that data can be obtained via ftp.
The first argument is the url and the second is the browser text.
A third argument, similar to the macros above, is intended for stuff printed
immediately afterwards.
The second and the third parameter are optional.
Hyphenation is disabled while printing the actual URL.
As an example, here the location of the
.FTP ftp://\:ftp.gnu.org/ "GNU ftp server" .
The macro example above was specified by:
.RS
.IP
.B .FTP ftp://\[rs]:ftp.gnu.org/ \[dq]GNU ftp server\[dq] .
.RE
.
.TP
.B .TAG name
Generates an html name tag from its argument.
This can then be referenced using the
.URL #URL URL
macro.
As you can see, you must precede the tag name with
.B #
since it is a local reference.
This link was achieved via placing a TAG in the URL description above;
the source looks like this:
.RS
.IP
.nf
.ft B
\&.TP
\&.B URL
generates
\&.TAG URL
a URL using either two or three arguments.
\&.\|.\|.
.fi
.ft P
.RE
.
.TP
.B .IMG [-R|-L|-C] filename [width] [height]
Include a picture into the document.
The first argument is the horizontal location: right, left, or center
.RB ( \-R ,
.BR \-L ,
or
.BR \-C ).
Alignment is centered by default (-C).
The second argument is the filename.
The optional third and fourth arguments are the width and height.
If the width is absent it defaults to 1\~inch.
If the height is absent it defaults to the width.
This maps onto an html img tag.
If you are including a png image then it is advisable to use the
.B PIMG
macro.
.
.TP
.B .PIMG [-R|-L|-C] filename [width [height]]
Include an image in PNG format.
This macro takes exactly the same parameters as the
.B IMG
macro; it has the advantage of working with postscript and html devices
also since it can automatically convert the image into the EPS format,
using the following programs
of the
.B netpbm
package:
.BR pngtopnm ,
.BR pnmcrop ,
and
.BR pnmtops .
If the document isn't processed with
.B \-Thtml
it is necessary to use the
.B \-U
option of groff.
.
.TP
.B .MPIMG [-R|-L] [-G gap] filename [width [height]]
Place a PNG image on the margin and wrap text around it.
The first parameters are optional.
The alignment: left or right
.RB ( \-L
or
.BR \-R )
specifies the margin where the picture is placed at.
The default alignment is left
.RB ( -L ).
Optionally,
.BI \-G \~gap
can be used to arrange a gap between the picture
and the text that wraps around it.
The default gap width is zero.
.br
The first non-optional argument is the filename.
The optional following arguments are the width and height.
If the width is absent it defaults to 1\~inch.
If the height is absent it defaults to the width.
Example:
.RS
.IP
.nf
.ft B
\&.MPIMG -L -G 2c foo.png 3c 1.5c
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.IP
The height and width may also be given as percentages. The PostScript
device calculates the width from the
.B .l
register and the height from the
.B .p
register. For example:
.RS
.IP
.nf
.ft B
\&.MPIMG -L -G 2c foo.png 15%
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
.B .HnS n
Begin heading.
The numeric heading level
.I n
is specified by the first parameter.
Use this macro if your headings contain URL, FTP or MTO macros.
Example:
.RS
.IP
.nf
.ft B
\&.HnS 1
\&.HR
GNU Troff
\&.URL http://groff.ffii.org (Groff) 
\&\(em a
\&.URL http://www.gnu.org/ GNU
\&project.
\&Hosted by
\&.URL http://ffii.org/ FFII .
\&.HR
\&.HnE
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.IP
In this case you might wish to
disable automatic links to headings.
This can be done via
.B \-P\-l
from the command line.
.\" or by using a call to `.HX 0'.

.
.TP
.B .HnE
End heading.
.
.TP
.B .LK
.TAG LK
Force \%grohtml to place the automatically generated links at this position.
If this manual page has been processed with
.B \-Thtml
those links can be seen right here.
.
.LK
.
.TP
.B .HR
Generate a full-width horizontal rule for
.BR \-Thtml .
No effect for all other devices.
.
.TP
.B .NHR
Suppress generation of the top and bottom rules which \%grohtml emits
by default.
.
.TP
.B .HTL
Generate an HTML title only.
This differs from the 
.B TL
macro of the
.B ms
macro package which generates both an HTML title and an <H1> heading.
Use it to provide an HTML title as search engine fodder but a graphic title
in the document.
The macro terminates when a space or break is seen (.sp, .br).
.
.TP
.B .HEAD
Add arbitrary HTML data to the <head> block.
Ignored if not processed with
.BR \-Thtml .
Example:
.RS
.IP
.nf
.B ".HEAD" "\[dq]<link \[rs]"
.B "  rel=\[dq]\[dq]icon\[dq]\[dq] \[rs]"
.B "  type=\[dq]\[dq]image/png\[dq]\[dq] \[rs]"
.B "  href=\[dq]\[dq]http://foo.org//bar.png\[dq]\[dq]/>\[dq]"
.fi
.ft P
.RE
.
.TP
.B .HTML
All text after this macro is treated as raw html.
If the document is processed without
.B \-Thtml
then the macro is ignored.
Internally, this macro is used as a building block for other higher-level
macros.
.IP
For example, the
.B BGIMG
macro is defined as
.RS
.IP
.nf
.ft B
\&.de BGIMG
\&.   HTML <body background=\[rs]$1>
\&..
.ft P
.fi
.RE
.
.TP
.B .DC l text [color]
Produce a drop capital.
The first parameter is the letter to be dropped and enlarged, the second
parameter
.B text
is the ajoining text whose height the first letter should not exceed.
The optional third parameter is the color of the dropped letter.
It defaults to black.
.
.TP
.B ".CDS"
Start displaying a code section in constant width font.
.
.TP
.B ".CDE"
End code display
.
.SH SECTION HEADING LINKS
By default
.B \%grohtml
generates links to all section headings and places these at the top of the
html document. (See
.URL #LK LINKS
for details of how to switch this off or alter the position).
.
.
.SH LIMITATIONS OF GROHTML
.LP
.B tbl
information is currently rendered as a PNG image.
.
.
.SH FILES
@MACRODIR@/www.tmac
.
.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
.BR \%grohtml (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR netpbm (1)
.
.
.SH AUTHOR
.B \%grohtml
was written by
.MTO gaius@glam.ac.uk "Gaius Mulley"
.
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs to the
.MTO bug-groff@\:gnu.org "Groff Bug Mailing List" .
Include a complete, self-contained example that will allow the bug to be
reproduced, and say which version of groff you are using.
.
.cp \n[groff_www_C]
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
