.\" $Id: afslog.1,v 1.3 1998/06/30 15:28:48 assar Exp $
.\"
.Dd April 27, 1996
.Dt AFSLOG 1
.Os KTH-KRB
.Sh NAME
.Nm afslog
.Nd "obtains AFS tokens for specified cells"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d
.Op Fl c Ar cell
.Op Fl k Ar realm
.Op Fl p Pa path
.Op Fl unlog
.Op Fl createuser
.Op Ar args
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command obtains AFS tokens, 
.Ar args
are either a name of a cell or a pathnames of a file in the cell to
get tokens for. If an argument is 
.Li .
or 
.Li ..
or contains a slash it is assumed to be a pathname. Otherwise it is
assumed to be a name of a cell or a prefix thereof.
.Pp
The
.Fl c
and
.Fl p
flags can be used to resolve ambiguities.
.Pp
.Nm
might fail to guess the Kerberos realm to get tickets for (for
instance if the volume location servers of the cell does not reside in
the kerberos realm that holds the AFS service key, and the correct
realm isn't the same as the cell name or the local realm (I didn't say
this was a common problem)). Anyway, the
.Fl k
can be used to give a hint. It should not be used unless there is a
problem, since all tickets will be taken from the specified realm and
this is not (usually) what you want.
.Pp
.Fl createuser
means that
.Nm
should try to run
.Nm pts
to create a remote user principal in another cell.
.Fl d
can be used for debugging.
.Pp
If the
.Fl unlog
flag is given any tokens are removed and all other arguments are ignored.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kauth 1 ,
.Xr kafs 3
.Sh BUGS
It should be able to handle the MIT Athena
.Nm aklog
flags
.Fl hosts , 
.Fl zsubs , 
and
.Fl noprdb ,
but does not.
