.\" $Id: ext_srvtab.8,v 1.3 1997/04/02 21:09:51 assar Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\"
.\" For copying and distribution information,
.\" please see the file <mit-copyright.h>.
.\"
.TH EXT_SRVTAB 8 "Kerberos Version 4.0" "MIT Project Athena"
.SH NAME
ext_srvtab \- extract service key files from Kerberos key distribution center database
.SH SYNOPSIS
ext_srvtab [
.B \-n
] [
.B \-r realm
] [
.B hostname ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I ext_srvtab
extracts service key files from the Kerberos key distribution center
(KDC) database.
.PP
Upon execution, it prompts the user to enter the master key string for
the database.  If the
.B \-n
option is specified, the master key is instead fetched from the master
key cache file.
.PP
For each
.I hostname
specified on the command line, 
.I ext_srvtab
creates the service key file
.IR hostname -new-srvtab,
containing all the entries in the database with an instance field of
.I hostname.
This new file contains all the keys registered for Kerberos-mediated
service providing programs which use the 
.IR krb_get_phost (3)
principal and instance conventions to run on the host
.IR hostname .
If the
.B \-r
option is specified, the realm fields in the extracted file will
match the given realm rather than the local realm.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
.TP 20n
"verify_master_key: Invalid master key, does not match database."
The master key string entered was incorrect.
.SH FILES
.TP 20n
.IR hostname -new-srvtab
Service key file generated for
.I hostname
.TP
/var/kerberos/principal.pag, /var/kerberos/principal.dir
DBM files containing database
.TP
/.k
Master key cache file.
.SH SEE ALSO
read_service_key(3), krb_get_phost(3)
