.\" $Id: kadmind.8,v 1.6 1999/09/15 15:10:08 assar Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\"
.\" For copying and distribution information,
.\" please see the file <mit-copyright.h>.
.\"
.TH KADMIND 8 "Kerberos Version 4.0" "MIT Project Athena"
.SH NAME
kadmind \- network daemon for Kerberos database administration
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kadmind
[
.B \-n
] [
.B \-m
] [
.B \-h
] [
.B \-r realm
] [
.B \-f filename
] [
.B \-d dbname
] [
.B \-a acldir
] [
.B \-i address
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I kadmind
is the network database server for the Kerberos password-changing and
administration tools.
.PP
Upon execution, it fetches the master key from the key cache file.
.PP
If the
.B \-m
option is specified, it instead prompts the user to enter the master
key string for the database.
.PP
The
.B \-n
option is a no-op and is left for compatibility reasons.
.PP
If the
.B \-r
.I realm
option is specified, the admin server will pretend that its
local realm is 
.I realm
instead of the actual local realm of the host it is running on.
This makes it possible to run a server for a foreign kerberos
realm.
.PP
If the
.B \-f
.I filename
option is specified, then that file is used to hold the log information
instead of the default.
.PP
If the
.B \-d
.I dbname
option is specified, then that file is used as the database name instead
of the default.
.PP
If the
.B \-a
.I acldir
option is specified, then
.I acldir
is used as the directory in which to search for access control lists
instead of the default.
.PP
If the
.B \-h
option is specified,
.I kadmind
prints out a short summary of the permissible control arguments, and
then exits.
.PP
If the
.B \-i
option is specified,
.I kadmind
will only listen on that particular address and not on all configured
addresses of the host, which is the default.
.PP
When performing requests on behalf of clients,
.I kadmind
checks access control lists (ACLs) to determine the authorization of the client
to perform the requested action.
Currently four distinct access types are supported:
.TP 1i
Addition
(.add ACL file).  If a principal is on this list, it may add new
principals to the database.
.TP
Retrieval
(.get ACL file).  If a principal is on this list, it may retrieve
database entries.  NOTE:  A principal's private key is never returned by
the get functions.
.TP
Modification
(.mod ACL file).  If a principal is on this list, it may modify entries
in the database.
.TP
Deletions
(.del ACL file).  If a principal is on this list, if may delete
entries from the database.
.PP
A principal is always granted authorization to change its own password.
.SH FILES
.TP 20n
/var/log/admin_server.syslog
Default log file.
.TP 
/var/kerberos
Default access control list directory.
.TP
admin_acl.{add,get,mod}
Access control list files (within the directory)
.TP
/var/kerberos/principal.pag, /var/kerberos/principal.dir
Default DBM files containing database
.TP
/.k
Master key cache file.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
kerberos(1), kpasswd(1), kadmin(8), acl_check(3)
.SH AUTHORS
Douglas A. Church, MIT Project Athena
.br
John T. Kohl, Project Athena/Digital Equipment Corporation
