.\" $Id: kauth.1,v 1.3 1998/06/30 15:29:17 assar Exp $
.\"
.Dd May 4, 1996
.Dt KAUTH 1
.Os KTH-KRB
.Sh NAME
.Nm kauth
.Nd overworked Kerberos login program
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl n Ar name
.Op Fl r Ar remote user
.Op Fl t Pa remote ticket file
.Op Fl h Ar hosts...
.Op Fl l Ar lifetime
.Op Fl f Pa srvtab
.Op Fl c Ar cell
.Op Ar command ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command obtains ticket granting tickets as well as AFS ticket and
tokens. It also does a whole lot of other stuff.
.Pp
The following flags are supported:
.Bl -tag -width xxxx
.It Fl n
Principal to get tickets for. If no other arguments are present this
can be given without the
.Fl n
flag.
.It Fl h
Remote hosts to obtain tickets for. This works similar to the MIT
Athena Kerberos 4 patchlevel 10 command
.Xr rkinit 1 ,
however not in a compatible way. It requires that the remote host runs
the
.Xr kauthd 8 ,
server. The 
.Fl r
and
.Fl t
flags are useful only with this option.
.It Fl r
User on the remote host that should own the ticket file.
.It Fl t 
Ticket file on remote host.
.It Fl l
Lifetime of tickets in minutes. A value of -1 is used for maximum
ticket lifetime.
.It Fl f
Srvtab to get service keys from. Default is 
.Pa /etc/srvtab .
This is mainly used with batch services that need to run
authenticated. If any command is given, it will be executed in an
authenticated fashion and when the program exits the tickets are
destroyed. For long running jobs the tickets will be renewed.
.It Fl c
AFS cell to get tokens for, default is your local cell.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kinit 1 ,
.Xr kauthd 8 ,
.Xr kafs 3
.Sh BUGS
There is no help-switch.
