.\" $Id: kdestroy.1,v 1.4 1999/06/15 13:29:32 bg Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\"
.\" For copying and distribution information,
.\" please see the file <mit-copyright.h>.
.\"
.TH KDESTROY 1 "Kerberos Version 4.0" "MIT Project Athena"
.SH NAME
kdestroy \- destroy Kerberos tickets
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kdestroy
[
.B \-f
]
[
.B \-q
]
[
.B \-t
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I kdestroy
utility destroys the user's active
Kerberos
authorization tickets by writing zeros to the file that contains them.
If the ticket file does not exist,
.I kdestroy
displays a message to that effect.
.PP
After overwriting the file,
.I kdestroy
removes the file from the system.
The utility
displays a message indicating the success or failure of the
operation.
If
.I kdestroy
is unable to destroy the ticket file,
the utility will warn you by making your terminal beep.
.PP
In the Athena workstation environment,
the
.I toehold
service automatically destroys your tickets when you
end a workstation session.
If your site does not provide a similar ticket-destroying mechanism,
you can place the
.I kdestroy
command in your
.I .logout
file so that your tickets are destroyed automatically
when you logout.
.PP
The options to
.I kdestroy
are as follows:
.TP 7
.B \-f
.I kdestroy
runs without displaying the status message.
.TP
.B \-q
.I kdestroy
will not make your terminal beep if it fails to destroy the tickets.
.TP
.B \-t
destroy tickets only and keep all AFS tokens.
.TP
.B \-u
unlog, i.e remove any AFS tokens associated with the current PAG
but leave the ticket file alone.
.PP
If neither
.B \-t
nor 
.B \-u
is given, both tickets and AFS tokens are destroyed.
.SH FILES
KRBTKFILE environment variable if set, otherwise
.br
/tmp/tkt[uid]
.SH SEE ALSO
kerberos(1), kinit(1), klist(1)
.SH BUGS
.PP
Only the tickets in the user's current ticket file are destroyed.
Separate ticket files are used to hold root instance and password
changing tickets.  These files should probably be destroyed too, or
all of a user's tickets kept in a single ticket file.
.SH AUTHORS
Steve Miller, MIT Project Athena/Digital Equipment Corporation
.br
Clifford Neuman, MIT Project Athena
.br
Bill Sommerfeld, MIT Project Athena
