.\" $Id: kpasswd.1,v 1.2 1996/06/12 21:29:21 bg Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\"
.\" For copying and distribution information,
.\" please see the file <mit-copyright.h>.
.\"
.TH KPASSWD 1 "Kerberos Version 4.0" "MIT Project Athena"
.FM mit
.SH NAME
kpasswd \- change a user's Kerberos password
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kpasswd
[
.B \-h
] [
.B \-n
.I name
] [
.B \-i
.I instance
] [
.B \-r
.I realm
] [
\-u
.IR username[.instance][@realm] ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I kpasswd
command is used to change a Kerberos principal's password.
.PP
If the
.I \-h
option is specified, a brief summary of the options is printed, and 
.I kpasswd
then exits.
.PP
If the
.I \-n
option is specified, 
.I name
is used as the principal name rather than the username of the user
running
.IR kpasswd .
(This is determined from the ticket file if it exists;
otherwise, it is determined from the unix user id.)
.PP
If the
.I \-i
option is specified,
.I instance
is used as the instance rather than a null instance.
.PP
If the
.I \-r
option is specified,
.I realm
is used as the realm rather than the local realm.
.PP
If the 
.I \-u 
option is specified, a fully qualified kerberos
principal can be given.
.PP

The utility prompts for the current Kerberos password (printing
the name of the principal for which it intends to change the password),
which is verified by the Kerberos server.  If the old password is
correct, the user is prompted twice for the new password.  A message is
printed indicating the success or failure of the password changing
operation.

.SH BUGS

.I kpasswd
does not handle names, instances, or realms with special
characters in them when the -n, -i, or -r options are used.  Any
valid fullname is accepted, however, if the -u option is used.

If the principal whose password you are trying to change does
not exist, you will not be told until after you have entered the
old password.

.SH SEE ALSO
kerberos(1), kinit(1), passwd(1), kadmin(8)
