.\" $Id: kuserok.3,v 1.3 1996/10/13 17:51:18 bg Exp $
.\" Copyright 1989 by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
.\"
.\" For copying and distribution information,
.\" please see the file <mit-copyright.h>.
.\"
.TH KUSEROK 3 "Kerberos Version 4.0" "MIT Project Athena"
.SH NAME
kuserok \- Kerberos version of ruserok
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.nj
.ft B
#include <krb.h>
.PP
.ft B
kuserok(kdata, localuser)
AUTH_DAT *auth_data;
char   *localuser;
.fi
.ft R
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I kuserok
determines whether a Kerberos principal described by the structure
.I auth_data
is authorized to login as user
.I localuser
according to the authorization file
("~\fIlocaluser\fR/.klogin" by default).  It returns 0 (zero) if authorized,
1 (one) if not authorized.
.PP
If there is no account for 
.I localuser
on the local machine, authorization is not granted.
If there is no authorization file, and the Kerberos principal described
by 
.I auth_data
translates to 
.I localuser
(using 
.IR krb_kntoln (3)),
authorization is granted.
If the authorization file
can't be accessed, or the file is not owned by
.IR localuser,
authorization is denied.  Otherwise, the file is searched for
a matching principal name, instance, and realm.  If a match is found,
authorization is granted, else authorization is denied.
.PP
The file entries are in the format:
.nf
.in +5n
	name.instance@realm
.in -5n
.fi
with one entry per line.

For convenience ~localuser@LOCALREALM is
always considered to be an entry in the file even when there is no
file or the file is unreadable.
.SH SEE ALSO
kerberos(3), ruserok(3), krb_kntoln(3)
.SH FILES
.TP 20n
~\fIlocaluser\fR/.klogin
authorization list
