.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003
.\"	Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (FhG Fokus).
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Hartmut Brandt <harti@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" fatm(4) man page
.\"
.Dd May 15, 2003
.Dt FATM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fatm
.Nd "device driver for Fore PCA200E ATM interfaces"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device fatm
.Cd device utopia
.Cd device atm
.Pp
.Cd options NATM
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver supports the FORE (now Marconi) PCA200E ATM interface cards.
The driver interfaces with the
.Xr natm 4
framework,
.Xr netgraph 4
and HARP.
It provides only PVC services.
Signalling, ATMARP, ILMI and other
higher layer protocols are implemented using
.Xr netgraph 4
or HARP.
.Pp
For configuring the card for IP see
.Xr natmip 4 .
The following sysctls are recognized by the driver additionally to those
handled by
.Xr utopia 4 :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.atm.fatm Ns Ar N Ns Va .stats
Returns a device specific statistic list of
.Vt uint32_t
statistic counters.
.It Va hw.atm.fatm Ns Ar N Ns Va .istats
Returns a list of
.Vt uint32_t
with internal driver statistics.
.It Va hw.atm.fatm Ns Ar N Ns Va .retry_tx
If this is set packets are stuffed back into the interface's send queue when
the cards transmit queue is found to be full.
They are transmitted later.
If this is not set the packets are dropped.
It may be useful to set this
if only UBR traffic is sent.
.It Va hw.atm.fatm Ns Ar N Ns Va .debug
.Bf Em
(Only if debugging enabled.)
.Ef
These are debugging flags.
See
.Pa src/sys/dev/fatm/if_fatmvar.h
for the possible flags.
.El
.Pp
The driver supports the media options
.Cm sdh , noscramb
and
.Cm unassigned
(see
.Xr utopia 4 ) .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bd -literal
fatm0: <FORE PCA200E> mem 0xd5800000-0xd59fffff irq 9 at device 9.0 on pci0
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr natm 4 ,
.Xr natmip 4 ,
.Xr utopia 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Harti Brandt Aq harti@FreeBSD.org
.Sh BUGS
These cards can CBR shape a single VCC only.
It is currently possible to
request more than one CBR connection.
In this case all the timing will be
wrong.
See
.Xr hatm 4
for a better card.
