.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd May 26, 2012
.Dt PAM_GET_AUTHTOK 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pam_get_authtok
.Nd retrieve authentication token
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn pam_get_authtok "pam_handle_t *pamh" "int item" "const char **authtok" "const char *prompt"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pam_get_authtok
function returns the cached authentication token,
or prompts the user if no token is currently cached.
Either way, a pointer to the authentication token is stored in the
location pointed to by the
.Fa authtok
argument.
.Pp
The
.Fa item
argument must have one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Dv PAM_AUTHTOK
Returns the current authentication token, or the new token
when changing authentication tokens.
.It Dv PAM_OLDAUTHTOK
Returns the previous authentication token when changing
authentication tokens.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fa prompt
argument specifies a prompt to use if no token is cached.
If it is
.Dv NULL ,
the
.Dv PAM_AUTHTOK_PROMPT
or
.Dv PAM_OLDAUTHTOK_PROMPT
item,
as appropriate, will be used.
If that item is also
.Dv NULL ,
a hardcoded default prompt will be used.
Either way, the prompt is expanded using
.Xr openpam_subst 3
before it is
passed to the conversation function.
.Pp
If
.Fn pam_get_authtok
is called from a module and the
.Dv authtok_prompt
/
.Dv oldauthtok_prompt
option is set in the policy file, the value of that
option takes precedence over both the
.Fa prompt
argument and the
.Dv PAM_AUTHTOK_PROMPT
/
.Dv PAM_OLDAUTHTOK_PROMPT
item.
.Pp
If
.Fa item
is set to
.Dv PAM_AUTHTOK
and there is a non-null
.Dv PAM_OLDAUTHTOK
item,
.Fn pam_get_authtok
will ask the user to confirm the new token by
retyping it.
If there is a mismatch,
.Fn pam_get_authtok
will return
.Dv PAM_TRY_AGAIN .
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pam_get_authtok
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_BUF_ERR
Memory buffer error.
.It Bq Er PAM_CONV_ERR
Conversation failure.
.It Bq Er PAM_SYSTEM_ERR
System error.
.It Bq Er PAM_TRY_AGAIN
Try again.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openpam_subst 3 ,
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_get_item 3 ,
.Xr pam_get_user 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn pam_get_authtok
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn pam_get_authtok
function and this manual page were
developed for the
.Fx
Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the
Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.\& under
DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
