.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Sheldon Hearn
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 13, 2000
.Dt OSF/1 4 Alpha
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm osf1
.Nd OSF/1 ABI support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To link OSF/1 ABI support into the kernel:
.Cd "options COMPAT_OSF1"
.Pp
To load the OSF/1 ABI support kernel module:
.Dl kldload osf1
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module provides limited
alpha OSF/1 (also known as Digital UNIX, later known as Tru64 UNIX)
ABI (application binary interface)
compatibility for userland applications.
The module provides the following significant facilities:
.Bl -bullet
.It
An image activator
for ecoff executable images
.It
Special signal handling for activated images
.It
OSF/1 to native system call translation
.El
.Pp
It is important to note that the OSF/1 ABI support
it not provided through an emulator.
Rather, a true (albeit limited) ABI implementation is provided.
.Pp
The
.Nm
module can be loaded as required.
The following command will load the module
if it is not already loaded as a module:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if ! kldstat -v | grep -E osf1_ecoff > /dev/null; then
	kldload osf1 > /dev/null 2>&1
fi
.Ed
.Pp
Note that dynamically linked OSF/1 executables
will require a suitable environment in
.Pa /compat/osf1 .
.Pp
For information on loading the
.Nm
kernel loadable module automatically on system startup,
see
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /compat/osf1 -compact
.It Pa /compat/osf1
minimal OSF1 run-time environment
.El
.Sh BUGS
We cannot run OSF/1 applications which rely on the
.Xr pthread 3
API, such as the JDK.
OSF/1's pthreads library uses Mach system calls.
Mach system calls would be very difficult to support in
.Fx .
.Sh HISTORY
OSF/1 ABI support first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
