.\" Copyright (c) 1994
.\"     The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)vi.1	8.3 (Berkeley) 3/19/94
.\"
.Dd "March 19, 1994"
.Dt EX/VI 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ex, vi, view
.Nd text editors
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm \&ex
.Op Fl eFlRsv
.Op Fl c Ar cmd
.Op Fl r Ar file
.Op Fl t Ar tag
.Op Fl w Ar size
.Op Fl x Ar \&aw
.Op Ar "file ..."
.Nm \&vi
.Op Fl eFlRv
.Op Fl c Ar cmd
.Op Fl r Ar file
.Op Fl t Ar tag
.Op Fl w Ar size
.Op Fl x Ar \&aw
.Op Ar "file ..."
.Nm view
.Op Fl eFlRv
.Op Fl c Ar cmd
.Op Fl r Ar file
.Op Fl t Ar tag
.Op Fl w Ar size
.Op Fl x Ar \&aw
.Op Ar "file ..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm \&Vi
is a screen oriented text editor.
.Nm \&Ex
is a line-oriented text editor.
.Nm \&Ex
and
.Nm \&vi
are different interfaces to the same program,
and it is possible to switch back and forth during an edit session.
.Nm View
is the equivalent of using the
.Fl R
(read-only) option of
.Nm \&vi .
.Pp
This manual page is the one provided with the
.Nm ex/vi
versions of the
.Nm ex/vi
text editors.
.Nm Ex/vi
are intended as bug-for-bug compatible replacements for the original
Fourth Berkeley Software Distribution (4BSD)
.Nm \&ex
and
.Nm \&vi
programs.
For the rest of this manual page,
.Nm ex/vi
is used only when it's necessary to distinguish it from the historic
implementations of
.Nm ex/vi .
.Pp
This manual page is intended for users already familiar with
.Nm ex/vi .
Anyone else should almost certainly read a good tutorial on the
editor before this manual page.
If you're in an unfamiliar environment, and you absolutely have to
get work done immediately, read the section near the end of this
manual page, entitled FAST STARTUP.
It's probably enough to get you going.
.Pp
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width Ds 
.It Fl c
Execute
.Ar cmd
immediately after starting the edit session.
Particularly useful for initial positioning in the file, however
.Ar cmd
is not limited to positioning commands.
This is the POSIX 1003.2 interface for the historic
.Dq "+cmd"
syntax.
.Nm Ex/vi
supports both the old and new syntax.
.It Fl e
Start editing in ex mode, as if the command name were
.Nm \&ex .
.It Fl F
Don't copy the entire file when first starting to edit.
(The default is to make a copy in case someone else modifies
the file during your edit session.)
.It Fl l
List the files that may be recovered using the
.Fl r
option of
.Nm \&vi .
This is the new interface for the historic syntax of the
.Fl r
option without a file argument.
.Nm Ex/vi
supports both the old and new syntax.
.It Fl R
Start editing in read-only mode, as if the command name was
.Nm view ,
or the readonly option was set.
.It Fl r
Recover the specified file.
.It Fl s
Enter batch mode; applicable only to
.Nm \&ex
edit sessions.
Batch mode is useful when running
.Nm \&ex
scripts.
Prompts, informative messages and other user oriented message
are turned off,
and no startup files or environmental variables are read.
This is the POSIX 1003.2 interface for the historic
.Dq \&\-
argument.
.Nm \&Ex/vi
supports both the old and new syntax.
.It Fl t
Start editing at the specified tag.
(See
.Xr ctags 1 ).
.It Fl w
Set the initial window size to the specified number of lines.
.It Fl v
Start editing in vi mode, as if the command name was
.Nm \&vi
or
.Nm view .
.It Fl x
Reserved for X11 interfaces.
.Em "No X11 support is currently implemented."
.El
.Pp
.Nm Ex/vi
exit 0 on success, and greater than 0 if an error occurs.
.Sh ENVIRONMENTAL VARIABLES
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Ev COLUMNS
The number of columns on the screen.
This value overrides any system or terminal specific values.
If the COLUMNS environmental variable is not set when
.Nm ex/vi
runs, or the
.Sy columns
option is explicitly reset by the user,
.Nm ex/vi
enters the value into the environment.
.It Ev EXINIT
A list of
.Nm \&ex
startup commands.
.It Ev HOME
The user's home directory, used as the initial directory path
for the startup
.Pa $HOME/.exrc
file.
This value is also used as the default directory for the
.Nm \&vi
.Sy \&cd
command.
.It Ev LINES
The number of rows on the screen.
This value overrides any system or terminal specific values.
If the LINES environmental variable is not set when
.Nm ex/vi
runs, or the
.Sy lines
option is explicitly reset by the user,
.Nm ex/vi
enters the value into the environment.
.It Ev SHELL
The user's shell of choice (see also the
.Sy shell
option).
.It Ev TERM
The user's terminal type.
The default is the type
.Dq unknown .
If the TERM environmental variable is not set when
.Nm ex/vi
runs, or the
.Sy term
option is explicitly reset by the user,
.Nm ex/vi
enters the value into the environment.
.It Ev TMPDIR
The location used to stored temporary files (see also the
.Sy directory
option).
.El
.Sh SET OPTIONS
#include <set.opt.roff>
.Sh FAST STARTUP
This section will tell you the minimum amount that you need to
do simple editing tasks using
.Nm \&vi .
If you've never used any screen editor before, you're likely to have
problems even with this simple introduction.
In that case you should find someone that already knows
.Nm \&vi
and have them walk you through this section.
.Pp
.Nm \&Vi
is a screen editor.
This means that it takes up almost the entire screen, displaying part
of the file on each screen line, except for the last line of the screen.
The last line of the screen is used for you to give commands to
.Nm \&vi ,
and for
.Nm \&vi
to give information to you.
.Pp
The other fact that you need to understand is that
.Nm \&vi
is a modeful editor, i.e. you are either entering text or you
are executing commands, and you have to be in the right mode
to do one or the other.
You will be in command mode when you first start editing a file.
There are commands that switch you into input mode.
There is only one key that takes you out of input mode,
and that is the <escape> key.
(Key names are written using less-than and greater-than signs, e.g.
<escape> means the
.Dq escape
key, usually labeled
.Dq esc
on your terminal's keyboard.)
If you're ever confused as to which mode you're in,
keep entering the <escape> key until
.Nm \&vi
beeps at you.
(Generally,
.Nm \&vi
will beep at you if you try and do something that's not allowed.
It will also display error messages.)
.Pp
To start editing a file, enter the command
.Dq Li "vi file_name<carriage-return>" .
The command you should enter as soon as you start editing is
.Dq Li ":set verbose showmode<carriage-return>" .
This will make the editor give you verbose error messages and display
the current mode at the bottom of the screen.
.Pp
The commands to move around the file are:
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Sy h
Move the cursor left one character.
.It Sy j
Move the cursor down one line.
.It Sy k
Move the cursor up one line.
.It Sy l
Move the cursor right one character.
.It Sy <cursor-arrows>
The cursor arrow keys should work, too.
.It Sy /text<carriage-return>
Search for the string
.Dq text
in the file, and move the cursor to its first character.
.El
.Pp
The commands to enter new text are:
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Sy a
Append new text,
.Em after
the cursor.
.It Sy i
Insert new text,
.Em before
the cursor.
.It Sy o
Open a new line below the line the cursor is on, and start
entering text.
.It Sy O
Open a new line above the line the cursor is on, and start
entering text.
.It Sy <escape>
Once you've entered input mode using the one of the
.Sy \&a ,
.Sy \&i ,
.Sy \&O ,
or 
.Sy \&o
commands, use
.Sy <escape>
to quit entering text and return to command mode.
.El
.Pp
The commands to copy text are:
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Sy yy
Copy the line the cursor is on.
.It Sy p
Append the copied line after the line the cursor is on.
.El
.Pp
The commands to delete text are:
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Sy dd
Delete the line the cursor is on.
.It Sy x
Delete the character the cursor is on.
.El
.Pp
The commands to write the file are:
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Sy :w<carriage-return>
Write the file back to the file with the name that you originally used
as an argument on the
.Nm \&vi
command line.
.It Sy :w file_name<carriage-return>
Write the file back to the file with the name
.Dq file_name .
.El
.Pp
The commands to quit editing and exit the editor are:
.Bl -tag -width XXXX -compact
.It Sy :q<carriage-return>
Quit editing and leave vi (if you've modified the file, but not
saved your changes,
.Nm \&vi
will refuse to quit).
.It Sy :q!<carriage-return>
Quit, discarding any modifications that you may have made.
.El
.Pp
One final caution.
Unusual characters can take up more than one column on the screen,
and long lines can take up more than a single screen line.
The above commands work on
.Dq physical
characters and lines, i.e. they affect the entire line no matter
how many screen lines it takes up and the entire character no matter
how many screen columns it takes up.
.Sh BUGS
See the file
.Pa vi/docs/bugs.current
for a list of the known bugs in this version.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /var/tmp/vi.recover -compact
.It Pa /bin/sh
The default user shell.
.It Pa /etc/vi.exrc
System-wide vi startup file.
.It Pa /tmp
Temporary file directory.
.It Pa /var/tmp/vi.recover
Recovery file directory.
.It Pa $HOME/.exrc
user's home directory startup file.
.It Pa .exrc
local directory startup file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ctags 1 ,
.Xr vi-ref 1 ,
.Xr more 1 ,
.Xr curses 3 ,
.Xr dbopen 3
.sp
The
.Dq "Vi Quick Reference"
card.
.sp
.Dq "An Introduction to Display Editing with Vi" ,
found in the
.Dq "UNIX User's Manual Supplementary Documents" .
.sp
.Dq "Edit: A tutorial" ,
found in the
.Dq "UNIX User's Manual Supplementary Documents" .
.sp
.Dq "\&Ex Reference Manual (Version 3.7)" ,
found in the
.Dq "UNIX User's Manual Supplementary Documents" .
.Pp
.Nm Nroff/troff
source for the previous three documents are distributed with
.Nm ex/vi
in the
.Pa vi/docs/USD.doc
directory of the
.Nm ex/vi
source code.
.sp
The files
.Dq autowrite ,
.Dq input ,
.Dq quoting ,
and
.Dq structures ,
found in the
.Pa vi/docs/internals
directory of the
.Nm ex/vi
source code.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ex/vi
replacements for the
.Nm ex/vi
editor first appeared in 4.4BSD.
.Sh STANDARDS
.Nm \&Ex/vi
is close to IEEE Std1003.2 (``POSIX'').
That document differs from historical
.Nm ex/vi
practice in several places; there are changes to be made on both sides.
