@section Architectures
BFD keeps one atom in a BFD describing the
architecture of the data attached to the BFD: a pointer to a
@code{bfd_arch_info_type}.

Pointers to structures can be requested independently of a BFD
so that an architecture's information can be interrogated
without access to an open BFD.

The architecture information is provided by each architecture package.
The set of default architectures is selected by the macro
@code{SELECT_ARCHITECTURES}.  This is normally set up in the
@file{config/@var{target}.mt} file of your choice.  If the name is not
defined, then all the architectures supported are included.

When BFD starts up, all the architectures are called with an
initialize method.  It is up to the architecture back end to
insert as many items into the list of architectures as it wants to;
generally this would be one for each machine and one for the
default case (an item with a machine field of 0).

BFD's idea of an architecture is implemented in @file{archures.c}.

@subsection bfd_architecture


@strong{Description}@*
This enum gives the object file's CPU architecture, in a
global sense---i.e., what processor family does it belong to?
Another field indicates which processor within
the family is in use.  The machine gives a number which
distinguishes different versions of the architecture,
containing, for example, 2 and 3 for Intel i960 KA and i960 KB,
and 68020 and 68030 for Motorola 68020 and 68030.
@example
enum bfd_architecture
@{
  bfd_arch_unknown,   /* File arch not known */
  bfd_arch_obscure,   /* Arch known, not one of these */
  bfd_arch_m68k,      /* Motorola 68xxx */
#define bfd_mach_m68000 1
#define bfd_mach_m68008 2
#define bfd_mach_m68010 3
#define bfd_mach_m68020 4
#define bfd_mach_m68030 5
#define bfd_mach_m68040 6
#define bfd_mach_m68060 7
#define bfd_mach_cpu32  8
#define bfd_mach_mcf5200  9
#define bfd_mach_mcf5206e 10
#define bfd_mach_mcf5307  11
#define bfd_mach_mcf5407  12
  bfd_arch_vax,       /* DEC Vax */
  bfd_arch_i960,      /* Intel 960 */
    /* The order of the following is important.
       lower number indicates a machine type that
       only accepts a subset of the instructions
       available to machines with higher numbers.
       The exception is the "ca", which is
       incompatible with all other machines except
       "core". */

#define bfd_mach_i960_core      1
#define bfd_mach_i960_ka_sa     2
#define bfd_mach_i960_kb_sb     3
#define bfd_mach_i960_mc        4
#define bfd_mach_i960_xa        5
#define bfd_mach_i960_ca        6
#define bfd_mach_i960_jx        7
#define bfd_mach_i960_hx        8

  bfd_arch_a29k,      /* AMD 29000 */
  bfd_arch_sparc,     /* SPARC */
#define bfd_mach_sparc                 1
/* The difference between v8plus and v9 is that v9 is a true 64 bit env.  */
#define bfd_mach_sparc_sparclet        2
#define bfd_mach_sparc_sparclite       3
#define bfd_mach_sparc_v8plus          4
#define bfd_mach_sparc_v8plusa         5 /* with ultrasparc add'ns */
#define bfd_mach_sparc_sparclite_le    6
#define bfd_mach_sparc_v9              7
#define bfd_mach_sparc_v9a             8 /* with ultrasparc add'ns */
#define bfd_mach_sparc_v8plusb         9 /* with cheetah add'ns */
#define bfd_mach_sparc_v9b             10 /* with cheetah add'ns */
/* Nonzero if MACH has the v9 instruction set.  */
#define bfd_mach_sparc_v9_p(mach) \
  ((mach) >= bfd_mach_sparc_v8plus && (mach) <= bfd_mach_sparc_v9b \
   && (mach) != bfd_mach_sparc_sparclite_le)
  bfd_arch_mips,      /* MIPS Rxxxx */
#define bfd_mach_mips3000              3000
#define bfd_mach_mips3900              3900
#define bfd_mach_mips4000              4000
#define bfd_mach_mips4010              4010
#define bfd_mach_mips4100              4100
#define bfd_mach_mips4111              4111
#define bfd_mach_mips4300              4300
#define bfd_mach_mips4400              4400
#define bfd_mach_mips4600              4600
#define bfd_mach_mips4650              4650
#define bfd_mach_mips5000              5000
#define bfd_mach_mips6000              6000
#define bfd_mach_mips8000              8000
#define bfd_mach_mips10000             10000
#define bfd_mach_mips12000             12000
#define bfd_mach_mips16                16
#define bfd_mach_mips32                32
#define bfd_mach_mips32_4k             3204113 /* 32, 04, octal 'K' */
#define bfd_mach_mips5                 5
#define bfd_mach_mips64                64
#define bfd_mach_mips_sb1              12310201 /* octal 'SB', 01 */
  bfd_arch_i386,      /* Intel 386 */
#define bfd_mach_i386_i386 0
#define bfd_mach_i386_i8086 1
#define bfd_mach_i386_i386_intel_syntax 2
#define bfd_mach_x86_64 3
#define bfd_mach_x86_64_intel_syntax 4
  bfd_arch_we32k,     /* AT&T WE32xxx */
  bfd_arch_tahoe,     /* CCI/Harris Tahoe */
  bfd_arch_i860,      /* Intel 860 */
  bfd_arch_i370,      /* IBM 360/370 Mainframes */
  bfd_arch_romp,      /* IBM ROMP PC/RT */
  bfd_arch_alliant,   /* Alliant */
  bfd_arch_convex,    /* Convex */
  bfd_arch_m88k,      /* Motorola 88xxx */
  bfd_arch_pyramid,   /* Pyramid Technology */
  bfd_arch_h8300,     /* Hitachi H8/300 */
#define bfd_mach_h8300   1
#define bfd_mach_h8300h  2
#define bfd_mach_h8300s  3
  bfd_arch_powerpc,   /* PowerPC */
#define bfd_mach_ppc           0
#define bfd_mach_ppc_403       403
#define bfd_mach_ppc_403gc     4030
#define bfd_mach_ppc_505       505
#define bfd_mach_ppc_601       601
#define bfd_mach_ppc_602       602
#define bfd_mach_ppc_603       603
#define bfd_mach_ppc_ec603e    6031
#define bfd_mach_ppc_604       604
#define bfd_mach_ppc_620       620
#define bfd_mach_ppc_630       630
#define bfd_mach_ppc_750       750
#define bfd_mach_ppc_860       860
#define bfd_mach_ppc_a35       35
#define bfd_mach_ppc_rs64ii    642
#define bfd_mach_ppc_rs64iii   643
#define bfd_mach_ppc_7400      7400
  bfd_arch_rs6000,    /* IBM RS/6000 */
#define bfd_mach_rs6k          0
#define bfd_mach_rs6k_rs1      6001
#define bfd_mach_rs6k_rsc      6003
#define bfd_mach_rs6k_rs2      6002
  bfd_arch_hppa,      /* HP PA RISC */
  bfd_arch_d10v,      /* Mitsubishi D10V */
#define bfd_mach_d10v          0
#define bfd_mach_d10v_ts2      2
#define bfd_mach_d10v_ts3      3
  bfd_arch_d30v,      /* Mitsubishi D30V */
  bfd_arch_m68hc11,   /* Motorola 68HC11 */
  bfd_arch_m68hc12,   /* Motorola 68HC12 */
  bfd_arch_z8k,       /* Zilog Z8000 */
#define bfd_mach_z8001         1
#define bfd_mach_z8002         2
  bfd_arch_h8500,     /* Hitachi H8/500 */
  bfd_arch_sh,        /* Hitachi SH */
#define bfd_mach_sh            0
#define bfd_mach_sh2        0x20
#define bfd_mach_sh_dsp     0x2d
#define bfd_mach_sh3        0x30
#define bfd_mach_sh3_dsp    0x3d
#define bfd_mach_sh3e       0x3e
#define bfd_mach_sh4        0x40
  bfd_arch_alpha,     /* Dec Alpha */
#define bfd_mach_alpha_ev4  0x10
#define bfd_mach_alpha_ev5  0x20
#define bfd_mach_alpha_ev6  0x30
  bfd_arch_arm,       /* Advanced Risc Machines ARM */
#define bfd_mach_arm_2         1
#define bfd_mach_arm_2a        2
#define bfd_mach_arm_3         3
#define bfd_mach_arm_3M        4
#define bfd_mach_arm_4         5
#define bfd_mach_arm_4T        6
#define bfd_mach_arm_5         7
#define bfd_mach_arm_5T        8
#define bfd_mach_arm_5TE       9
#define bfd_mach_arm_XScale    10
  bfd_arch_ns32k,     /* National Semiconductors ns32000 */
  bfd_arch_w65,       /* WDC 65816 */
  bfd_arch_tic30,     /* Texas Instruments TMS320C30 */
  bfd_arch_tic54x,    /* Texas Instruments TMS320C54X */
  bfd_arch_tic80,     /* TI TMS320c80 (MVP) */
  bfd_arch_v850,      /* NEC V850 */
#define bfd_mach_v850          0
#define bfd_mach_v850e         'E'
#define bfd_mach_v850ea        'A'
  bfd_arch_arc,       /* ARC Cores */
#define bfd_mach_arc_5         0
#define bfd_mach_arc_6         1
#define bfd_mach_arc_7         2
#define bfd_mach_arc_8         3
  bfd_arch_m32r,      /* Mitsubishi M32R/D */
#define bfd_mach_m32r          0 /* backwards compatibility */
#define bfd_mach_m32rx         'x'
  bfd_arch_mn10200,   /* Matsushita MN10200 */
  bfd_arch_mn10300,   /* Matsushita MN10300 */
#define bfd_mach_mn10300               300
#define bfd_mach_am33          330
  bfd_arch_fr30,
#define bfd_mach_fr30          0x46523330
  bfd_arch_mcore,
  bfd_arch_ia64,      /* HP/Intel ia64 */
#define bfd_mach_ia64_elf64    0
#define bfd_mach_ia64_elf32    1
  bfd_arch_pj,
  bfd_arch_avr,       /* Atmel AVR microcontrollers */
#define bfd_mach_avr1          1
#define bfd_mach_avr2          2
#define bfd_mach_avr3          3
#define bfd_mach_avr4          4
#define bfd_mach_avr5          5
  bfd_arch_cris,      /* Axis CRIS */
  bfd_arch_last
  @};
@end example

@subsection bfd_arch_info


@strong{Description}@*
This structure contains information on architectures for use
within BFD.
@example

typedef struct bfd_arch_info
@{
  int bits_per_word;
  int bits_per_address;
  int bits_per_byte;
  enum bfd_architecture arch;
  unsigned long mach;
  const char *arch_name;
  const char *printable_name;
  unsigned int section_align_power;
  /* True if this is the default machine for the architecture.  */
  boolean the_default;
  const struct bfd_arch_info * (*compatible)
       PARAMS ((const struct bfd_arch_info *a,
                const struct bfd_arch_info *b));

  boolean (*scan) PARAMS ((const struct bfd_arch_info *, const char *));

  const struct bfd_arch_info *next;
@} bfd_arch_info_type;
@end example

@findex bfd_printable_name
@subsubsection @code{bfd_printable_name}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const char *bfd_printable_name(bfd *abfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return a printable string representing the architecture and machine
from the pointer to the architecture info structure.

@findex bfd_scan_arch
@subsubsection @code{bfd_scan_arch}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const bfd_arch_info_type *bfd_scan_arch(const char *string);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Figure out if BFD supports any cpu which could be described with
the name @var{string}.  Return a pointer to an @code{arch_info}
structure if a machine is found, otherwise NULL.

@findex bfd_arch_list
@subsubsection @code{bfd_arch_list}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const char **bfd_arch_list(void);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return a freshly malloced NULL-terminated vector of the names
of all the valid BFD architectures.  Do not modify the names.

@findex bfd_arch_get_compatible
@subsubsection @code{bfd_arch_get_compatible}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const bfd_arch_info_type *bfd_arch_get_compatible(
    const bfd *abfd,
    const bfd *bbfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Determine whether two BFDs'
architectures and machine types are compatible.  Calculates
the lowest common denominator between the two architectures
and machine types implied by the BFDs and returns a pointer to
an @code{arch_info} structure describing the compatible machine.

@findex bfd_default_arch_struct
@subsubsection @code{bfd_default_arch_struct}
@strong{Description}@*
The @code{bfd_default_arch_struct} is an item of
@code{bfd_arch_info_type} which has been initialized to a fairly
generic state.  A BFD starts life by pointing to this
structure, until the correct back end has determined the real
architecture of the file.
@example
extern const bfd_arch_info_type bfd_default_arch_struct;
@end example

@findex bfd_set_arch_info
@subsubsection @code{bfd_set_arch_info}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
void bfd_set_arch_info(bfd *abfd, const bfd_arch_info_type *arg);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Set the architecture info of @var{abfd} to @var{arg}.

@findex bfd_default_set_arch_mach
@subsubsection @code{bfd_default_set_arch_mach}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
boolean bfd_default_set_arch_mach(bfd *abfd,
    enum bfd_architecture arch,
    unsigned long mach);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Set the architecture and machine type in BFD @var{abfd}
to @var{arch} and @var{mach}.  Find the correct
pointer to a structure and insert it into the @code{arch_info}
pointer.

@findex bfd_get_arch
@subsubsection @code{bfd_get_arch}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
enum bfd_architecture bfd_get_arch(bfd *abfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return the enumerated type which describes the BFD @var{abfd}'s
architecture.

@findex bfd_get_mach
@subsubsection @code{bfd_get_mach}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
unsigned long bfd_get_mach(bfd *abfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return the long type which describes the BFD @var{abfd}'s
machine.

@findex bfd_arch_bits_per_byte
@subsubsection @code{bfd_arch_bits_per_byte}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
unsigned int bfd_arch_bits_per_byte(bfd *abfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return the number of bits in one of the BFD @var{abfd}'s
architecture's bytes.

@findex bfd_arch_bits_per_address
@subsubsection @code{bfd_arch_bits_per_address}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
unsigned int bfd_arch_bits_per_address(bfd *abfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return the number of bits in one of the BFD @var{abfd}'s
architecture's addresses.

@findex bfd_default_compatible
@subsubsection @code{bfd_default_compatible}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const bfd_arch_info_type *bfd_default_compatible
   (const bfd_arch_info_type *a,
    const bfd_arch_info_type *b);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
The default function for testing for compatibility.

@findex bfd_default_scan
@subsubsection @code{bfd_default_scan}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
boolean bfd_default_scan(const struct bfd_arch_info *info, const char *string);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
The default function for working out whether this is an
architecture hit and a machine hit.

@findex bfd_get_arch_info
@subsubsection @code{bfd_get_arch_info}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const bfd_arch_info_type * bfd_get_arch_info(bfd *abfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return the architecture info struct in @var{abfd}.

@findex bfd_lookup_arch
@subsubsection @code{bfd_lookup_arch}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const bfd_arch_info_type *bfd_lookup_arch
   (enum bfd_architecture
    arch,
    unsigned long machine);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Look for the architecure info structure which matches the
arguments @var{arch} and @var{machine}. A machine of 0 matches the
machine/architecture structure which marks itself as the
default.

@findex bfd_printable_arch_mach
@subsubsection @code{bfd_printable_arch_mach}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
const char *bfd_printable_arch_mach
   (enum bfd_architecture arch, unsigned long machine);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return a printable string representing the architecture and
machine type.

This routine is depreciated.

@findex bfd_octets_per_byte
@subsubsection @code{bfd_octets_per_byte}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
unsigned int bfd_octets_per_byte(bfd *abfd);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
Return the number of octets (8-bit quantities) per target byte
(minimum addressable unit).  In most cases, this will be one, but some
DSP targets have 16, 32, or even 48 bits per byte.

@findex bfd_arch_mach_octets_per_byte
@subsubsection @code{bfd_arch_mach_octets_per_byte}
@strong{Synopsis}
@example
unsigned int bfd_arch_mach_octets_per_byte(enum bfd_architecture arch,
    unsigned long machine);
@end example
@strong{Description}@*
See bfd_octets_per_byte.

This routine is provided for those cases where a bfd * is not
available

