.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1999-2010,2016 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" Author: Thomas E. Dickey 1999-on
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_extend.3x,v 1.67 2025/11/12 00:46:51 tom Exp $
.TH curs_extend 3X 2025-11-11 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.SH NAME
\fB\%curses_version\fP,
\fB\%use_extended_names\fP \-
miscellaneous \fIncurses\fR extensions
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBconst char * curses_version(void);
\fBint use_extended_names(bool \fIbf\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These
.I \%ncurses
extensions to the
.I curses
library do not fit easily into other functional categories.
.SS curses_version
.B \%curses_version
returns a pointer to a string containing the library's name
and version number,
including its patch level,
for example
\*(``ncurses 6.5.20240720\*(''.
.SS use_extended_names
.B \%use_extended_names
configures whether the library recognizes
user-defined or nonstandard
.I \%term\%info
capability names that may be compiled into terminal type descriptions
via the \fB\%curs_terminfo\fP(3X) or \fB\%curs_termcap\fP(3X) interfaces.
Normally these names are available for use,
since the essential decision
is made through use of \fB\%@TIC@\fP(1)'s
.B \-x
option to include such extensions in terminal type descriptions.
.B \%use_extended_names(FALSE)
prevents
.I \%ncurses
from recognizing these capabilities
to ensure compatibility with other implementations of
.IR curses .
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B \%curses_version
returns a constant string.
.PP
.B \%use_extended_names
returns the previous state of extended capability name recognition,
allowing you to save this property and restore it.
.SH NOTES
The pointer returned by
.B \%curses_version
corresponds to statically allocated memory;
do not attempt to \fIfree\fP(3) it.
.SH EXTENSIONS
These functions are
.I \%ncurses
extensions,
and are not found in SVr4
.IR curses ,
4.4BSD
.IR curses ,
or any other previous
.I curses
implementation.
.SH PORTABILITY
Applications employing
.I \%ncurses
extensions should condition their use on the visibility of the
.B \%NCURSES_VERSION
preprocessor macro.
.PP
NetBSD 9 added a
.I \%curses_version
function
that intentionally returns a string devoid of version information.
.\" See https://mail-index.netbsd.org/tech-userlevel/2019/08/27/\
.\" msg012068.html and follow-up messages.
.SH AUTHORS
Thomas Dickey
.SH SEE ALSO
.I \%ncurses
offers several other extensions to the X/Open Curses API.
.PP
\fB\%curs_getch\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_inopts\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_mouse\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_print\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_util\fP(3X),
\fB\%default_colors\fP(3X),
\fB\%define_key\fP(3X),
\fB\%keybound\fP(3X),
\fB\%keyok\fP(3X),
\fB\%new_pair\fP(3X),
\fB\%resizeterm\fP(3X),
\fB\%wresize\fP(3X)
