.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2019-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 2002-2012,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_addwstr.3x,v 1.60 2025/03/15 20:41:04 tom Exp $
.TH curs_addwstr 3X 2025-03-15 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.SH NAME
\fB\%addwstr\fP,
\fB\%waddwstr\fP,
\fB\%mvaddwstr\fP,
\fB\%mvwaddwstr\fP,
\fB\%addnwstr\fP,
\fB\%waddnwstr\fP,
\fB\%mvaddnwstr\fP,
\fB\%mvwaddnwstr\fP \-
add a wide-character string to a \fIcurses\fR window and advance the cursor
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint addwstr(const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP);
\fBint waddwstr(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP);
\fBint mvaddwstr(int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP, const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP);
\fBint mvwaddwstr(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP,
      const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP);
.PP
\fBint addnwstr(const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP, int \fIn\fP);
\fBint waddnwstr(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP, int \fIn\fP);
\fBint mvaddnwstr(int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP, const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP, int \fIn\fP);
\fBint mvwaddnwstr(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP,
      const wchar_t * \fIwstr\fP, int \fIn\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B \%waddwstr
writes the characters of the (wide-null-terminated) wide-character
string
.I wstr
to the window
.IR win ,
as if by
constructing a
.I cchar_t
for each
.I wchar_t
in
.IR wstr ,
then calling \fB\%wadd_wch\fP(3X) with the resulting
.IR cchar_t .
.I curses
processes spacing and non-spacing characters in
.I wstr
one at a time.
.B \%waddnwstr
is similar,
but writes at most
.I n
wide characters.
If
.I n
is \-1,
.B \%waddnwstr
writes the entire wide string.
\fB\%ncurses\fP(3X) describes the variants of these functions.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These functions return
.B OK
on success and
.B ERR
on failure.
.PP
In
.IR \%ncurses ","
these functions fail if
.bP
the
.I curses
screen has not been initialized,
.bP
.I wstr
is a null pointer,
.bP
(for functions taking a
.I \%WINDOW
pointer argument)
.I win
is a null pointer,
or
.bP
an internal \fB\%wadd_wch\fP(3X) call returns
.BR ERR "."
.PP
Functions prefixed with \*(``mv\*('' first perform cursor movement and
fail if the position
.RI ( y ,
.IR x )
is outside the window boundaries.
.SH NOTES
All of these functions except
.B \%waddnwstr
may be implemented as macros.
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 describes these functions.
.PP
SVr4 describes a successful return value only as
\*(``an integer value other than
.IR ERR \*(''. \" Courier roman in source; SVID 4, vol. 3, p. 478
.SH HISTORY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 (1995) initially specified these functions.
The System\ V Interface Definition Version\ 4
of the same year
specified functions named
.I \%waddwstr
and
.I \%waddnwstr
(and the usual variants).
.\" SVID 4, vol 3., p. 478
These were later additions to
.RI SVr4. x ,
not appearing in the first SVr4 (1989).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curs_addstr\fP(3X) describes comparable functions of the
.I \%ncurses
library in its non-wide-character configuration.
.PP
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_add_wch\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_add_wchstr\fP(3X)
