.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2019-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 2007-2015,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_legacy.3x,v 1.32 2024/03/16 15:35:01 tom Exp $
.TH curs_legacy 3X 2024-03-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.SH NAME
\fB\%getattrs\fP,
\fB\%getbegx\fP,
\fB\%getbegy\fP,
\fB\%getcurx\fP,
\fB\%getcury\fP,
\fB\%getmaxx\fP,
\fB\%getmaxy\fP,
\fB\%getparx\fP,
\fB\%getpary\fP \-
get \fIcurses\fR cursor and window coordinates or attributes (legacy)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint getattrs(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
.PP
\fBint getbegx(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
\fBint getbegy(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
.PP
\fBint getcurx(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
\fBint getcury(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
.PP
\fBint getmaxx(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
\fBint getmaxy(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
.PP
\fBint getparx(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
\fBint getpary(const WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These legacy functions are simpler to use
than the X/Open \fIcurses\fP functions:
.bP
The \fB\%getattrs\fP function returns the same attribute data
as \fB\%wattr_get\fP.
.IP
However, \fB\%getattrs\fP returns an integer (actually a \fB\%chtype\fP),
while \fB\%wattr_get\fP returns the current color pair in a separate parameter.
In the wide-character library configuration,
color pairs may not fit into a \fB\%chtype\fP,
so \fB\%wattr_get\fP is the only way to obtain the color information.
.IP
Because \fB\%getattrs\fP returns the attributes in a single parameter,
it would not be possible for an application to distinguish that from
\fBERR\fP (a \fI-1\fP).
If the window parameter is null, \fB\%getattrs\fP
returns \fB\%A_NORMAL\fP (zero).
.bP
The \fB\%getbegy\fP and \fB\%getbegx\fP functions return the same
data as \fB\%getbegyx\fP.
.bP
The \fB\%getcury\fP and \fB\%getcurx\fP functions return the same
data as \fB\%getyx\fP.
.bP
The \fB\%getmaxy\fP and \fB\%getmaxx\fP functions return the same
data as \fB\%getmaxyx\fP.
.bP
The \fB\%getpary\fP and \fB\%getparx\fP functions return the same
data as \fB\%getparyx\fP.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Except as noted,
these functions return an integer,
or \fBERR\fP if the window parameter is null.
.SH NOTES
All of these interfaces are implemented as macros and functions.
The macros are suppressed
(and only the functions provided)
in an \*(``opaque\*(''
.I \%ncurses
build,
which defines the preprocessor symbol
.BR \%NCURSES_OPAQUE .
See section \*(``ALTERNATE CONFIGURATIONS\*('' in \fB\%ncurses\fP(3X).
.PP
The standard forms such as \fB\%getyx\fP
.I must
be implemented as macros,
and
(in this implementation)
are defined in terms of the functions described here,
to avoid reliance on internal details of the \fI\%WINDOW\fP structure.
.SH PORTABILITY
These functions were supported on Version 7, BSD or System V implementations.
None of those implementations checked the window parameter.
.PP
The \fB\%getattrs\fP function and macro are defined to return a (signed) integer
for compatibility with those implementations
although an unsigned type would have been more appropriate.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_getyx\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_opaque\fP(3X)
