.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2006,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_scroll.3x,v 1.59 2025/04/05 22:20:39 tom Exp $
.TH curs_scroll 3X 2025-04-05 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.SH NAME
\fB\%scroll\fP,
\fB\%scrl\fP,
\fB\%wscrl\fP \-
scroll a \fIcurses\fP window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint scroll(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP);
.PP
\fBint scrl(int \fIn\fP);
\fBint wscrl(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, int \fIn\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B scroll
scrolls the given window up one line.
That is,
every visible line we might number
.I i
becomes line
.IR i "\-1."
.B \%wscrl
and
.B \%scrl
scroll the specified window or
.BR \%stdscr ","
respectively,
up or down per the sign of
.IR n "."
.bP
For positive
.IR n ","
line
.IR i + n
becomes
.I i
(scrolling up);
.bP
for negative
.IR n ","
line
.IR i \- n
becomes
.I i
(scrolling down).
.PP
A line that scrolls beyond the window boundaries disappears;
.I curses
populates a new one emerging at the opposite boundary
with the background character;
see \fB\%bkgd\fP(3X)
(wide-character API users: \fB\%bkgrnd\fP(3X)).
As an optimization,
if the scrolling region of the window is the entire screen,
the physical screen may be scrolled at the same time;
see \fB\%curscr\fP(3X).
.PP
The cursor does not move.
These functions perform no operation unless scrolling is enabled for the
window via \fB\%scrollok\fP(3X).
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
These functions return
.B ERR
upon failure and
.B OK
upon success.
.PP
In
.IR \%ncurses ","
they return
.B ERR
if
.bP
the
.I curses
screen has not been initialized,
.bP
(for functions taking a
.I \%WINDOW
pointer argument)
.I win
is a null pointer,
or
.bP
scrolling is not enabled in the window
(as by \fB\%scrollok\fP(3X)).
.SH NOTES
.B \%scroll
and
.B \%scrl
may be implemented as macros.
.PP
Unusually,
there is no
.B \%wscroll
function;
.B scroll
behaves as one would expect
.B \%wscroll
to,
accepting a
.I \%WINDOW
pointer argument.
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 describes these functions.
It specifies no error conditions for them.
.PP
SVr4 describes a successful return value only as
\*(``an integer value other than
.IR ERR \*(''. \" Courier roman in source; SVID 4, vol. 3, p. 531
.PP
SVr4 indicates that the optimization of physically scrolling immediately
if the scroll region is the entire screen \*(``is\*('' performed,
not \*(``may be\*('' performed.
.I \%ncurses
deliberately does not guarantee that this occurs,
to leave open the possibility of better optimization of multiple scroll
actions on the next update.
.PP
Neither SVr4
.I curses
nor X/Open Curses specify whether these functions zero the attributes or
color pair identifier of the background character.
In
.IR \%ncurses ","
they do not.
.SH HISTORY
4BSD (1980)
introduced
.IR scroll ","
defining it as a function.
.PP
SVr3.1 (1987)
added
.I \%scrl
and
.IR \%wscrl ","
redefining
.I \%scroll
as a macro wrapping the latter.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_outopts\fP(3X)
