.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2010,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_insch.3x,v 1.56 2025/03/08 23:10:02 tom Exp $
.TH curs_insch 3X 2025-03-08 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.SH NAME
\fB\%insch\fP,
\fB\%winsch\fP,
\fB\%mvinsch\fP,
\fB\%mvwinsch\fP \-
insert a \fIcurses\fP character in a window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>\fP
.PP
\fBint insch(chtype \fIch\fP);
\fBint winsch(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, chtype \fIch\fP);
\fBint mvinsch(int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP, chtype \fIch\fP);
\fBint mvwinsch(WINDOW * \fIwin\fP, int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP, chtype \fIch\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B \%winsch
inserts the
.I curses
character
.I ch
at the cursor position in the window
.IR win "."
The character previously at the cursor and any to its right move one
cell to the right;
the formerly rightmost character on the line is discarded.
Unlike \fB\%addch\fP(3X),
.B \%winsch
does not advance the cursor.
\fB\%ncurses\fP(3X) describes the variants of this function.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
These functions return
.B OK
on success and
.B ERR
on failure.
.PP
In
.IR \%ncurses ,
they return
.B ERR
if
.bP
the
.I curses
screen has not been initialized,
or
.bP
(for functions taking a
.I \%WINDOW
pointer argument)
.I win
is a null pointer.
.PP
Functions prefixed with \*(``mv\*('' first perform cursor movement and
fail if the position
.RI ( y ,
.IR x )
is outside the window boundaries.
.SH NOTES
.BR \%insch ","
.BR \%mvinsch ","
and
.B \%mvwinsch
may be implemented as macros.
.PP
.I curses
does not necessarily employ the terminal's
.B \%insert_character
.RB ( ich1 )
capability to achieve insertion.
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 describes these functions.
It specifies no error conditions for them.
.PP
SVr4 describes a successful return value only as
\*(``an integer value other than
.IR ERR \*(''. \" Courier roman in source; SVID 4, vol. 3, p. 509
.SH HISTORY
SVr2 (1984) introduced these functions.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fB\%curs_ins_wch\fP(3X) describes comparable functions in the
wide-character
.I curses
configuration.
.PP
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%terminfo\fP(5)
