.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2010,2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_termattrs.3x,v 1.61 2025/08/23 22:39:20 tom Exp $
.TH curs_termattrs 3X 2025-08-23 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.SH NAME
\fB\%baudrate\fP,
\fB\%erasechar\fP,
\fB\%erasewchar\fP,
\fB\%has_ic\fP,
\fB\%has_il\fP,
\fB\%killchar\fP,
\fB\%killwchar\fP,
\fB\%longname\fP,
\fB\%term_attrs\fP,
\fB\%termattrs\fP,
\fB\%termname\fP \-
get and set terminal attributes with \fIcurses\fP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint baudrate(void);
\fBchar erasechar(void);
\fBint erasewchar(wchar_t * \fIwc\fP);
\fBbool has_ic(void);
\fBbool has_il(void);
\fBchar killchar(void);
\fBint killwchar(wchar_t * \fIwc\fP);
\fBchar * longname(void);
\fBattr_t term_attrs(void);
\fBchtype termattrs(void);
\fBchar * termname(void);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.SS baudrate
.B \%baudrate
returns the line speed of the terminal,
an integer value measured in bits per second,
for example
.BR 9600 "."
.SS "erasechar, erasewchar"
.B \%erasechar
returns the terminal's erase character.
.PP
.B \%erasewchar
stores the erase character in the location referenced by
.IR wc "."
If no erase character has been defined,
it fails and the location referenced by
.I wc
is not changed.
.SS "has_ic, has_il"
.B \%has_ic
returns
.B TRUE
if the terminal has insert- and delete-character capabilities.
.PP
.B \%has_il
returns
.B TRUE
if the terminal has insert- and delete-line capabilities,
or can simulate them using scrolling regions.
It might be used to determine whether it would be appropriate
to use \fBscrollok\fP(3X) to turn on scrolling.
.SS "killchar, killwchar"
.B \%killchar
returns the terminal's line kill character.
.PP
.B \%killwchar
stores the line-kill character in the location referenced by
.IR wc "."
If no line-kill character has been defined,
it fails and the location referenced by
.I wc
is not changed.
.SS longname
.B \%longname
returns a pointer to static storage
containing a verbose description of the terminal being managed by
.IR curses "."
The maximum length of a verbose description is 128 characters.
The storage is populated only after \fBinitscr\fP(3X) or
\fBnewterm\fP(3X) is called.
This storage is overwritten by each call to
.B \%newterm
and not restored by \fBset_term\fP(3X),
so its contents should be saved between calls to
.B \%initscr
or
.B \%newterm
if
.B \%longname
is to be used with multiple terminals.
.SS "termattrs, term_attrs"
If a given terminal does not support a video attribute that an
application program is trying to use,
.I curses
may substitute a
different video attribute for it.
.B \%termattrs
and
.B \%term_attrs
return a logical \*(``or\*('' of all video attributes supported by the
terminal using
.B A_
and
.B WA_
constants respectively.
This information is useful when a
.I curses
program
needs complete control over the appearance of the screen.
.SS termname
.B \%termname
returns the terminal name used by \fBsetupterm\fP(3X).
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B \%longname
and
.B \%termname
return
.I NULL
on error.
.PP
Functions that return an integer return
.B ERR
upon failure and
.B OK
upon success.
.SH NOTES
.BR \%erasewchar ","
.BR \%killwchar ","
and
.B \%term_attrs
are part of
.IR \%ncurses "'s"
wide-character API,
and are not available in its non-wide-character configuration.
.PP
.B \%termattrs
may be implemented as a macro.
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 describes these functions.
.PP
SVr4 describes a successful return value only as
\*(``an integer value other than
.IR ERR \*(''. \" Courier roman in source; SVID 4, vol. 3, p. 535
.PP
Most versions of
.I curses
truncate the string returned by
.I \%termname
to 14 characters.
.SH HISTORY
4BSD (1980)
introduced
.IR \%longname "."
.PP
SVr2 (1984)
added
.IR \%baudrate ","
.IR \%erasechar ","
.IR \%killchar ","
.IR \%has_ic ","
and
.IR \%has_il "."
.PP
SVr3 (1987)
supplied
.IR \%termname "."
Later that year,
SVr3.1 brought
.IR \%termattrs "."
.PP
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 (1995)
specified
.IR \%erasewchar ","
.IR \%killwchar ","
and
.IR \%term_attrs "."
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_initscr\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_outopts\fP(3X)
