.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2010,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: curs_printw.3x,v 1.65 2025/08/16 19:59:33 tom Exp $
.TH curs_printw 3X 2025-08-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.SH NAME
\fB\%printw\fP,
\fB\%wprintw\fP,
\fB\%mvprintw\fP,
\fB\%mvwprintw\fP,
\fB\%vwprintw\fP,
\fB\%vw_printw\fP \-
write formatted output to a \fIcurses\fR window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint printw(const char *\fIfmt\fP, ...);
\fBint wprintw(WINDOW *\fIwin\fP, const char *\fIfmt\fP, ...);
\fBint mvprintw(int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP, const char *\fIfmt\fP, ...);
\fBint mvwprintw(WINDOW *\fIwin\fP, int \fIy\fP, int \fIx\fP, const char *\fIfmt\fP, ...);
.PP
\fBint vw_printw(WINDOW *\fIwin\fP, const char *\fIfmt\fP, va_list \fIvarglist\fP);
.PP
\fI/* obsolete */\fP
\fBint vwprintw(WINDOW *\fIwin\fP, const char *\fIfmt\fP, va_list \fIvarglist\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB\%printw\fP,
\fB\%wprintw\fP,
\fB\%mvprintw\fP,
and
\fB\%mvwprintw\fP
are analogous to \fI\%printf\fP(3).
In effect,
the string that would be output by \fI\%printf\fP(3) is instead output
as though \fB\%waddstr\fP(3X) were used with
.I win
(or
.BR \%stdscr )
as its first argument.
.PP
\fB\%vwprintw\fP
and
\fB\%vw_printw\fP are analogous to \fI\%vprintf\fP(3),
and perform a \fB\%wprintw\fP using a variable argument list.
The third argument is a \fI\%va_list\fP,
a pointer to a list of arguments,
as defined in \fI\%stdarg.h\fP.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These functions return
.B ERR
upon failure and
.B OK
upon success.
.PP
In
.IR \%ncurses ,
failure occurs if the library cannot allocate enough memory for the
buffer into which the output is formatted,
or if the window pointer
.I win
is null.
.PP
Functions prefixed with \*(``mv\*('' first perform cursor movement and
fail if the position
.RI ( y ,
.IR x )
is outside the window boundaries.
.SH NOTES
No wide character counterpart functions are defined by the
\*(``wide\*(''
.I \%ncurses
configuration nor by any standard.
To format and write a wide-character string to a
.I curses
window,
consider using \fI\%swprintf\fP(3) and \fB\%waddwstr\fP(3X) or similar.
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 describes these functions.
It specifies no error conditions for them.
.PP
.I \%ncurses
defines \fB\%vw_printw\fP and \fB\%vwprintw\fP identically to support
legacy applications.
However,
the latter is obsolete.
.bP
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 Version\ 2 (1996),
marked \fB\%vwprintw\fP as requiring \fI\%varargs.h\fP and
\*(``TO BE WITHDRAWN\*('',
and specified \fB\%vw_printw\fP using the \fI\%stdarg.h\fP interface.
.bP
X/Open Curses Issue\ 5, Draft 2
(December 2007) marked \fBvwprintw\fP (along with
\fBvwscanw\fP and the \fItermcap\fP interface) as withdrawn.
After incorporating review comments,
this became
X/Open Curses Issue\ 7 (2009).
.bP
.I \%ncurses
provides \fB\%vwprintw\fP,
but marks it as deprecated.
.SH HISTORY
4BSD (1980)
introduced
.I \%wprintw
and its variants.
.\" https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=4BSD/usr/src/lib/\
.\"   libcurses/printw.c
.\" https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=4BSD/usr/src/lib/\
.\"   libcurses/mvprintw.c
It implemented all as functions,
not macros;
this initial distribution of
.I curses
preceded the ANSI C standard of 1989,
prior to which a variadic macro facility was not widely available
in the language.
.I \%printw
went unused in Berkeley distributions until 4.1cBSD (1983),
which employed it in games.
.\" https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=4.1cBSD/usr/src/\
.\"   games/canfield.c
.\" https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=4.1cBSD/usr/src/\
.\"   games/worm.c
4BSD's
.I \%wprintw
did not use
.IR \%varargs.h ","
which had been available since Seventh Edition Unix (1979).
.\" https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=V7/usr/include/\
.\"  varargs.h
In 1991
(a couple of years after SVr4 was generally available,
and after the C standard was published),
other developers updated the library,
using
.I \%stdarg.h
internally in 4.4BSD
.IR curses .
Even with this improvement,
BSD
.I curses
did not use function prototypes
(nor even declare functions)
in
.I \%curses.h
until 1992.
.PP
4BSD documented
.I \%printw
and
.I \%wprintw
tersely as \*(``printf on
.IR \%stdscr "\*(''"
and \*(``printf on
.IR win "\*('',"
respectively.
.\" https://minnie.tuhs.org/cgi-bin/utree.pl?file=4BSD/usr/man/man3/\
.\"  curses.3
.PP
SVr3 summarized the functions in three lines,
asserting that they were analogous to \fI\%printf\fP(3)
and explaining that the string that \fI\%printf\fP(3) would write to the
standard output stream would instead be output using
.I \%waddstr
to the given window.
.\" GBR can't find a source to cite for this paraphrase,
.\" even after checking
.\" <https://github.com/ryanwoodsmall/oldsysv/tree/master>.
.\"
.\" The indicated paraphrase is from page 432:
.\" Unix System V Programmer's Reference Manual
.\" Prentice-Hall
.\" ISBN 0-13-940479-1
.\" (bitsavers has 3rd printing from 1987)
.\"
.\" This lists mvprintw without detail, and printw as "printf on stdscr":
.\" Unix Programmer's Manual
.\" System Calls and Library Routines
.\" CBS College Publishing's UNIX System Library
.\" Holt, Rinehard and Winston, 1986
.\" ISBN 0-03-009314-7
.PP
SVr3 added
.IR \%vwprintw ","
describing its third parameter as a
.IR \%va_list ","
defined in
.IR \%varargs.h ","
and referred the reader to the manual pages for
.I \%varargs
and
.I \%vprintf
for detailed descriptions.
.PP
SVr4 (1989) introduced no new variations of
.IR \%printw ","
but provided for using either
.I \%varargs.h
or
.I \%stdarg.h
to define the
.I \%va_list
type.
.\" either header declares "va_list", but only one can be used
.PP
X/Open Curses Issue\ 4 (1995),
defined
.I \%vw_printw
to replace
.IR \%vwprintw ","
stating that its
.I \%va_list
type is defined in
.IR \%stdarg.h "."
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_addstr\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_scanw\fP(3X),
\fB\%printf\fP(3),
\fB\%vprintf\fP(3)
