.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2010,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" Author: Thomas E. Dickey 1997
.\"
.\" $Id: define_key.3x,v 1.52 2024/12/28 21:26:21 tom Exp $
.TH define_key 3X 2024-12-28 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.
.SH NAME
\fB\%define_key\fP \-
define a \fIcurses\fP function key code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint define_key(const char * \fIdefinition\fP, int \fIkey-code\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B \%define_key
.I \%ncurses
extension permits a
.I curses
application to
.I bind
a string
.I definition
to the function key
.I key-code
returned by \fB\%wgetch\fP(3X)
(wide-character API users:
\fB\%wget_wch\fP(3X))
when \fB\%keypad\fP(3X) is enabled in a window and a function key is
pressed.
.I \%ncurses
interprets such a binding as it does those in the
.I \%term\%info
database entry for the terminal type.
.PP
A
.I definition
of
.I NULL
removes any existing binding from
.IR key-code "."
Similarly,
a non-positive
.I key-code
removes an existing binding for
.IR definition ","
if any.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B \%define_key
returns
.B ERR
if
.bP
.I definition
is
.I NULL
and
.I key-code
is nonpositive,
or
.bP
insufficient memory is available to bind
.I definition
to
.IR key-code "."
.PP
Otherwise,
.B \%define_key
returns
.BR OK "."
.SH EXTENSIONS
.B \%define_key
is an
.I \%ncurses
extension.
.SH PORTABILITY
Applications employing
.I \%ncurses
extensions should condition their use on the visibility of the
.B \%NCURSES_VERSION
preprocessor macro.
.PP
NetBSD
.I curses
since 2.0 (2004) supports
.IR \%define_key "."
.SH AUTHORS
Thomas Dickey
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%keybound\fP(3X),
\fB\%keyok\fP(3X),
\fB\%key_defined\fP(3X),
\fB\%terminfo\fP(5)
