'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2006,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: form_field_attributes.3x,v 1.35 2024/03/16 15:35:01 tom Exp $
.TH form_field_attributes 3X 2024-03-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.SH NAME
\fBform_field_attributes\fP \-
color and attribute control for form fields
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <form.h>
.PP
\fBint set_field_fore(FIELD *\fIfield\fP, chtype \fIattr\fP);
\fBchtype field_fore(const FIELD *\fIfield\fP);
.PP
\fBint set_field_back(FIELD *\fIfield\fP, chtype \fIattr\fP);
\fBchtype field_back(const FIELD *\fIfield\fP);
.PP
\fBint set_field_pad(FIELD *\fIfield\fP, int \fIpad\fP);
\fBint field_pad(const FIELD *\fIfield\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function \fBset_field_fore\fP sets the foreground attribute of
\fIfield\fP. This is the highlight used to display the field contents.  The
function \fBfield_fore\fP returns the foreground attribute.
The default is
\fBA_STANDOUT\fP.
.PP
The function \fBset_field_back\fP sets the background attribute of
\fIform\fP. This is the highlight used to display the extent fields in the
form.
The function \fBfield_back\fP returns the background attribute.
The
default is \fBA_NORMAL\fP.
.PP
The function \fBset_field_pad\fP sets the character used to fill the field.
The function \fBfield_pad\fP returns the given form's pad character.
The
default is a blank.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These routines return one of the following:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_ARGUMENT
Routine detected an incorrect or out-of-range argument.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fP(3)).
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V forms library.
They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.
Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric S. Raymond.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X) and related pages whose names begin \*(``form_\*(''
for detailed descriptions of the entry points.
