.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1999-2008,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" Author: Thomas E. Dickey 1999
.\"
.\" $Id: keybound.3x,v 1.42 2024/12/28 21:26:21 tom Exp $
.TH keybound 3X 2024-12-28 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.SH NAME
\fB\%keybound\fP \-
get definition of a \fIcurses\fP function key code
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBchar * keybound(int \fIkey-code\fP, int \fIcount\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.B \%keybound
.I \%ncurses
extension permits a
.I curses
application to obtain the value of the string
.I bound
to the function key
.IR key-code ";"
see \fB\%wgetch\fP(3X)
(wide-character API users: \fB\%wget_wch\fP(3X)).
By default,
such bindings are string capabilities from the
.I \%term\%info
database entry corresponding to the terminal type.
The application can non-destructively and repeatedly
override such definitions with
\fB\%define_key\fP(3X),
as if by pushing new definitions onto a stack.
The
.I count
parameter accesses the
.IR n th
most recently defined binding;
.B 0
selects the binding that is used on input.
.SH RETURN VALUE
If
.I key-code
corresponds to a function key defined
by the application
or the terminal type in use,
.B \%keybound
allocates and returns a string
that must be freed by the application.
.B \%keybound
returns
.I NULL
if
.I key-code
is not positive
or if it does not correspond to a key code definition.
.SH EXTENSIONS
.B \%keybound
is an
.I \%ncurses
extension.
.SH PORTABILITY
Applications employing
.I \%ncurses
extensions should condition their use on the visibility of the
.B \%NCURSES_VERSION
preprocessor macro.
.SH AUTHORS
Thomas Dickey
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%define_key\fP(3X),
\fB\%keyok\fP(3X),
\fB\%key_defined\fP(3X),
\fB\%terminfo\fP(5)
