.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2010,2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: menu_requestname.3x,v 1.33 2024/03/16 15:35:01 tom Exp $
.TH menu_requestname 3X 2024-03-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.SH NAME
\fBmenu_request_by_name\fP,
\fBmenu_request_name\fP \-
handle printable menu request names
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <menu.h>
.PP
\fBconst char *menu_request_name(int \fIrequest\fP);
\fBint menu_request_by_name(const char *\fIname\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function \fBmenu_request_name\fP returns the printable name of a menu
request code.
.br
The function \fBmenu_request_by_name\fP searches in the name-table for a request
with the given name and returns its request code.
Otherwise E_NO_MATCH is returned.
.SH RETURN VALUE
\fBmenu_request_name\fP returns \fBNULL\fP on error
and sets \fBerrno\fP to \fBE_BAD_ARGUMENT\fP.
.br
\fBmenu_request_by_name\fP returns \fBE_NO_MATCH\fP on error.
It does not set \fBerrno\fP.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines are specific to \fI\%ncurses\fP.
They were not supported on
Version 7, BSD or System V implementations.
It is recommended that
any code depending on them be conditioned using NCURSES_VERSION.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.
Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric S. Raymond.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%menu\fP(3X)
