.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2007,2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: menu_hook.3x,v 1.32 2024/03/16 15:35:01 tom Exp $
.TH menu_hook 3X 2024-03-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.SH NAME
\fBmenu_hook\fP \-
set hooks for automatic invocation by applications
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <menu.h>
.PP
\fBint set_item_init(MENU *\fImenu\fP, Menu_Hook \fIfunc\fP);
\fBMenu_Hook item_init(const MENU *\fImenu\fP);
.PP
\fBint set_item_term(MENU *\fImenu\fP, Menu_Hook \fIfunc\fP);
\fBMenu_Hook item_term(const MENU *\fImenu\fP);
.PP
\fBint set_menu_init(MENU *\fImenu\fP, Menu_Hook \fIfunc\fP);
\fBMenu_Hook menu_init(const MENU *\fImenu\fP);
.PP
\fBint set_menu_term(MENU *\fImenu\fP, Menu_Hook \fIfunc\fP);
\fBMenu_Hook menu_term(const MENU *\fImenu\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions make it possible to set hook functions to be called at various
points in the automatic processing of input event codes by \fBmenu_driver\fP.
.PP
The function \fBset_item_init\fP sets a hook to be called at menu-post time and
each time the selected item changes (after the change).
\fBitem_init\fP
returns the current item init hook, if any (\fBNULL\fP if there is no such
hook).
.PP
The function \fBset_item_term\fP sets a hook to be called at menu-unpost time
and each time the selected item changes (before the change).
\fBitem_term\fP
returns the current item term hook, if any (\fBNULL\fP if there is no such
hook).
.PP
The function \fBset_menu_init\fP sets a hook to be called at menu-post time and
just after the top row on the menu changes once it is posted.
\fBmenu_init\fP
returns the current menu init hook, if any (\fBNULL\fP if there is no such
hook).
.PP
The function \fBset_menu_term\fP sets a hook to be called at menu-unpost time
and just before the top row on the menu changes once it is posted.
\fBmenu_term\fP returns the current menu term hook, if any (\fBNULL\fP if there
is no such hook).
.SH RETURN VALUE
Routines that return pointers return \fBNULL\fP on error.
Other routines
return one of the following:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fP(3)).
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V menu library.
They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.
Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric
S. Raymond.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%menu\fP(3X)
