.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2016,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: menu_post.3x,v 1.36 2024/03/16 15:35:01 tom Exp $
.TH menu_post 3X 2024-03-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.SH NAME
\fBpost_menu\fP,
\fBunpost_menu\fP \-
write or erase menus from associated subwindows
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <menu.h>
.PP
\fBint post_menu(MENU *\fImenu\fP);
\fBint unpost_menu(MENU *\fImenu\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
The function \fBpost_menu\fP displays a menu to its associated subwindow.
To
trigger physical display of the subwindow,
use \fBrefresh\fP(3X) or some equivalent
\fBcurses\fP routine (the implicit \fBdoupdate\fP triggered by an \fBcurses\fP
input request will do).
\fBpost_menu\fP resets the selection status of all items.
.PP
The function \fBunpost_menu\fP erases menu from its associated subwindow.
.SH RETURN VALUE
These routines return one of the following:
.TP 5
.B E_OK
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
.B E_SYSTEM_ERROR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fP(3)).
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_ARGUMENT
Routine detected an incorrect or out-of-range argument.
.TP 5
.B E_POSTED
The menu has already been posted.
.TP 5
.B E_BAD_STATE
Routine was called from an initialization or termination function.
.TP 5
.B E_NO_ROOM
Menu is too large for its window.
You should consider using \fBset_menu_format\fP to solve the problem.
.TP 5
.B E_NOT_POSTED
The menu has not been posted.
.TP 5
.B E_NOT_CONNECTED
No items are connected to the menu.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V menu library.
They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.
Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric S. Raymond.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%menu\fP(3X)
