'\" t
.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                        *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: mitem_userptr.3x,v 1.6 1998/11/29 01:12:47 Rick.Ohnemus Exp $
.TH mitem_userptr 3X ""
.SH NAME
\fBmitem_userptr\fR - associate application data with a menu item
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <menu.h>\fR
.br
int set_item_userptr(ITEM *item, void *userptr);
.br
void *item_userptr(const ITEM *item);
.br
.SH DESCRIPTION
Every menu item has a field that can be used to hold application-specific data
(that is, the menu-driver code leaves it alone).  These functions get and set
that field.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Except for \fBitem_userptr\fR (which returns \fBNULL\fR on error), each function returns one of the following:
.TP 5
\fBE_OK\fR
The routine succeeded.
.TP 5
\fBE_SYSTEM_ERROR\fR
System error occurred (see \fBerrno\fR).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fBcurses\fR(3X), \fBmenu\fR(3X).
.SH NOTES
The header file \fB<menu.h>\fR automatically includes the header file
\fB<curses.h>\fR.
.SH PORTABILITY
These routines emulate the System V menu library.  They were not supported on
Version 7 or BSD versions.

The user pointer should be a void pointer.  We leave it as a char pointer for
SVr4 compatibility.
.SH AUTHORS
Juergen Pfeifer.  Manual pages and adaptation for new curses by Eric
S. Raymond.
.\"#
.\"# The following sets edit modes for GNU EMACS
.\"# Local Variables:
.\"# mode:nroff
.\"# fill-column:79
.\"# End:
