.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2016,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: panel.3x,v 1.63 2024/03/16 15:35:01 tom Exp $
.TH panel 3X 2024-03-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.SH NAME
panel \-
panel stack extension for \fIcurses\fP
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <panel.h>
.PP
\fBPANEL *new_panel(WINDOW *\fIwin\fP);
.PP
\fBint bottom_panel(PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
\fBint top_panel(PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
\fBint show_panel(PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
\fBvoid update_panels(void);
\fBint hide_panel(PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
.PP
\fBWINDOW *panel_window(const PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
\fBint replace_panel(PANEL *\fIpan\fP, WINDOW *\fIwindow\fP);
\fBint move_panel(PANEL *\fIpan\fP, int \fIstarty\fP, int \fIstartx\fP);
\fBint panel_hidden(const PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
.PP
\fBPANEL *panel_above(const PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
\fBPANEL *panel_below(const PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
.PP
\fBint set_panel_userptr(PANEL *\fIpan\fP, const void *\fIptr\fP);
\fBconst void *panel_userptr(const PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
.PP
\fBint del_panel(PANEL *\fIpan\fP);
.PP
\fI/* ncurses extensions */\fP
\fBPANEL *ground_panel(SCREEN *\fIsp\fP);
\fBPANEL *ceiling_panel(SCREEN *\fIsp\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
Panels are \fBcurses\fP(3X) windows with the added property of
depth.
Panel functions allow the use of stacked windows and ensure that the
proper portions of each window and the \fIcurses\fP \fB\%stdscr\fP
window are hidden or displayed when panels are added,
moved,
modified,
or removed.
The set of currently visible panels is the stack of panels.
The
\fB\%stdscr\fP window is beneath all panels,
and is not considered part of the stack.
.PP
A window is associated with each panel.
The panel routines enable you to create,
move,
hide,
and show panels.
You can relocate a panel to any desired position in the stack.
.PP
Panel routines are a functional layer added to \fIcurses\fP,
make only high-level \fIcurses\fP calls,
and work anywhere \fIcurses\fP does.
.SH FUNCTIONS
.\" ---------
.SS bottom_panel
\fB\%bottom_panel(\fIpan\fB)\fR
puts panel \fIpan\fP at the bottom of all panels.
.\" ---------
.SS ceiling_panel
\fB\%ceiling_panel(\fIsp\fB)\fR
acts like \fB\%panel_below(NULL)\fP
for the given \fISCREEN\fP \fIsp\fP.
.\" ---------
.SS del_panel
\fB\%del_panel(\fIpan\fB)\fR
removes the given panel \fIpan\fP from the stack and deallocates the
\fI\%PANEL\fP structure (but not its associated window).
.\" ---------
.SS ground_panel
\fB\%ground_panel(\fIsp\fB)\fR
acts like \fB\%panel_above(NULL)\fP
for the given \fISCREEN\fP \fIsp\fP.
.\" ---------
.SS hide_panel
\fB\%hide_panel(\fIpan\fB)\fR
removes the given panel \fIpan\fP from the panel stack
and thus hides it from view.
The \fI\%PANEL\fP structure is not lost,
merely removed from the stack.
.\" ---------
.SS move_panel
\fB\%move_panel(\fIpan\fB, \fIstarty\fB, \fIstartx\fB)\fR
moves the given panel \fIpan\fP's window so that its upper-left corner
is at
\fIstarty\fP,
\fIstartx\fP.
It does not change the position of the panel in the stack.
Be sure to use this function,
not \fB\%mvwin\fP(3X),
to move a panel window.
.\" ---------
.SS new_panel
\fB\%new_panel(\fIwin\fB)\fR allocates a \fI\%PANEL\fR structure,
associates it with \fIwin\fP,
places the panel on the top of the stack
(causes it to be displayed above any other panel)
and returns a pointer to the new panel.
.\" ---------
.SS panel_above
\fB\%panel_above(\fIpan\fB)\fR
returns a pointer to the panel above \fIpan\fP.
If the panel argument is
\*(``\fB(PANEL *)0\fP\*('',
it returns a pointer to the bottom panel in the stack.
.\" ---------
.SS panel_below
\fB\%panel_below(\fIpan\fB)\fR
returns a pointer to the panel just below \fIpan\fP.
If the panel argument is
\*(``\fB(PANEL *)0\fP\*('',
it returns a pointer to the top panel in the stack.
.\" ---------
.SS panel_hidden
\fB\%panel_hidden(\fIpan\fB)\fR
returns \fBFALSE\fP if the panel \fIpan\fP is in the panel stack,
and \fBTRUE\fP if it is not.
If the panel is a null pointer,
it returns \fBERR\fP.
.\" ---------
.SS panel_userptr
\fB\%panel_userptr(\fIpan\fB)\fR
returns the user pointer for a given panel \fIpan\fP.
.\" ---------
.SS panel_window
\fB\%panel_window(\fIpan\fB)\fR
returns a pointer to the window of the given panel \fIpan\fP.
.\" ---------
.SS replace_panel
\fB\%replace_panel(\fIpan\fB, \fIwindow\fB)\fR
replaces the current window of panel \fIpan\fP with \fIwindow\fP
This is useful if,
for example,
you want to resize a panel.
In \fI\%ncurses\fP,
you can call \fB\%replace_panel\fP
to resize a panel using a window resized with \fB\%wresize\fP(3X).
It does not change the position of the panel in the stack.
.\" ---------
.SS set_panel_userptr
\fB\%set_panel_userptr(\fIpan\fB, \fIptr\fB)\fR
sets the panel's user pointer.
.\" ---------
.SS show_panel
\fB\%show_panel(\fIpan\fB)\fR
makes a hidden panel visible by placing it on top of the panels in the
panel stack.
See \*(``PORTABILITY\*('' below.
.\" ---------
.SS top_panel
\fB\%top_panel(\fIpan\fB)\fR
puts the given visible panel \fIpan\fP on top of all panels in the
stack.
See \*(``PORTABILITY\*('' below.
.\" ---------
.SS update_panels
\fB\%update_panels()\fR
refreshes the virtual screen to reflect the relations between the panels
in the stack,
but does not call \fB\%doupdate\fP(3X) to refresh the physical screen.
Use this function and not \fB\%wrefresh\fP(3X) or
\fB\%wnoutrefresh\fP(3X).
.PP
\fB\%update_panels\fP may be called more than once before a call to
\fB\%doupdate\fP,
but \fB\%doupdate\fP is the function responsible for updating
the physical screen.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
Each routine that returns a pointer returns \fBNULL\fP if an error
occurs.
Each routine that returns an int value returns \fBOK\fP if it
executes successfully and \fBERR\fP if not.
.PP
Except as noted,
the \fIpan\fP and \fIwindow\fP parameters must be non-null.
If either is null,
an error is returned.
.PP
The \fB\%move_panel\fP function uses \fBmvwin\fP(3X),
and returns an error if \fB\%mvwin\fP returns an error.
.SH NOTES
The header file \fI\%panel.h\fP itself includes the header file
\fI\%curses.h\fP.
.SH PORTABILITY
Reasonable care has been taken to ensure compatibility
with the native panel facility introduced in System\ V;
inspection of the SVr4 manual pages suggests the programming interface
never changed.
The \fI\%PANEL\fP data structures are merely similar.
The programmer is cautioned not to directly use \fI\%PANEL\fP fields.
.PP
The functions \fB\%show_panel\fP and \fB\%top_panel\fP are identical
in this implementation,
and work equally well with displayed or hidden panels.
In the System\ V implementation,
\fB\%show_panel\fP is intended for making a hidden panel visible
(at the top of the stack)
and \fB\%top_panel\fP is intended for making an already-visible panel
move to the top of the stack.
You are cautioned to use the correct
function to ensure compatibility with System\ V panel libraries.
.SH HISTORY
A panel facility was documented in SVr4.2's
\fICharacter User Interface Programming\fP document.
.PP
It is not part of X/Open Curses.
.PP
A few implementations exist:
.bP
Systems based on SVr4 source code,
such as Solaris,
provide this library.
.bP
\fI\%ncurses\fP (since version 0.6 in 1993)
and \fIPDCurses\fP (since version 2.2 in 1995)
provide a panel library whose common ancestor
is a public domain implementation by Warren Tucker
published in \fIu386mon\fP 2.20 (1990).
.IP
According to Tucker,
the System\ V panel library was first released in SVr3.2 (1988),
and his implementation helped with a port to SVr3.1 (1987).
.IP
Several developers have improved each of these;
they are no longer the same as Tucker's implementation.
.bP
NetBSD 8 (2018)
has a panel library begun by Valery Ushakov in 2015,
based on the System\ V documentation.
.SH AUTHORS
Warren Tucker <wht@n4hgf.mt\-park.ga.us> originally wrote this
implementation,
primarily to assist in porting \fI\%u386mon\fP to systems without a
native panel library.
.PP
Zeyd ben-Halim repackaged it for \fI\%ncurses\fP.
.PP
Juergen Pfeifer and Thomas E. Dickey revised and improved the library.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_variables\fP(3X)
