.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2019-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 2010-2015,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: term_variables.3x,v 1.44 2025/11/12 01:27:41 tom Exp $
.TH term_variables 3X 2025-11-11 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.SH NAME
\fB\%SP\fP,
\fB\%acs_map\fP,
\fB\%boolcodes\fP,
\fB\%boolfnames\fP,
\fB\%boolnames\fP,
\fB\%cur_term\fP,
\fB\%numcodes\fP,
\fB\%numfnames\fP,
\fB\%numnames\fP,
\fB\%strcodes\fP,
\fB\%strfnames\fP,
\fB\%strnames\fP,
\fB\%ttytype\fP \-
\fIterminfo\fR global variables
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
\fB#include <term.h>
.PP
\fBchtype acs_map[];
.PP
\fBSCREEN * SP;
.PP
\fBTERMINAL * cur_term;
.PP
\fBchar ttytype[];
.PP
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const boolcodes[];
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const boolfnames[];
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const boolnames[];
.PP
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const numcodes[];
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const numfnames[];
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const numnames[];
.PP
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const strcodes[];
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const strfnames[];
\fBNCURSES_CONST char * const strnames[];
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This page summarizes variables provided by the
.I curses
library's lower-level
.I \%term\%info
interface.
Locate a more complete description in the \fBcurs_terminfo\fP(3X) manual
page.
.PP
Depending on
.IR \%ncurses 's
build-time configuration,
these may be actual variables,
or macros
(see \fBcurs_threads\fP(3X))
that provide read-only access to
.IR curses 's
state.
In either case,
applications should treat them as read-only to avoid confusing the
library.
.SS "Alternate Character Set Mapping"
After initializing the
.I curses
or
.I \%term\%info
interfaces,
the
.B acs_map
array holds information used to translate cells with the
.B \%A_ALTCHARSET
video attribute into line-drawing characters.
.PP
The encoding of the information in this array has changed periodically.
Application developers need only know that it is used for the
\*(``ACS_\*('' constants in
.IR \%curses.h "."
.PP
The comparable data for the wide-character library are not exposed as
symbols in the API.
.SS "Current Terminal Data"
After initializing the
.I curses
or
.I \%term\%info
interfaces,
.B cur_term
contains data describing the current terminal.
It is also updated as a side effect of \fBset_term\fP(3X) and
\fBdelscreen\fP(3X).
.PP
It is possible to save a value of
.B cur_term
for subsequent use as a parameter to \fBset_term\fP(3X)
for switching between screens.
Alternatively,
one can save the return value from \fBnewterm\fP(3X) or
\fBsetupterm\fP(3X) to reuse in \fBset_term\fP(3X).
.SS "\fIterminfo\fP Lookup Tables"
The \fB@TIC@\fP(1) and \fB@INFOCMP@\fP(1) programs use lookup tables for
the long and short names of
.I \%term\%info
capabilities,
as well as the corresponding names for
.I termcap
capabilities.
These are available to other applications,
though the hash tables used by the
.I \%term\%info
and
.I termcap
functions are not.
.PP
.I \%term\%info
stores capability names in arrays with an \*(``f\*('' (eff) in their
names:
.BR \%boolfnames ","
.BR \%numfnames ","
and
.BR \%strfnames "."
It stores the briefer capability codes in arrays without the
\*(``f\*('':
.BR \%boolnames ","
.BR \%numnames ","
and
.BR \%strnames "."
The corresponding
.I termcap
capability codes are stored in
.BR \%boolcodes ","
.BR \%numcodes ","
and
.BR \%strcodes "."
\fB\%terminfo\fP(5) catalogs these.
.\"
.SS "Terminal Type"
A terminal description begins with one or more terminal names
separated by \*(``|\*('' (vertical bars).
On initialization of the
.I curses
or
.I \%term\%info
interfaces,
\fBsetupterm\fP(3X) copies the terminal name to the array
.BR ttytype "."
.\"
.SS "\fIterminfo\fP Names"
In addition to the variables,
.I term.h
also defines a symbol for each
.I \%term\%info
capability name.
These are in terms of the symbol
.BR CUR ","
which is defined
.PP
.RS
.EX
#define CUR ((TERMTYPE *)(cur_term))\->
.EE
.RE
.PP
These symbols provide a faster method of accessing
.I \%term\%info
capabilities than using,
for example,
\fBtigetstr\fP(3X).
.PP
The definition of
.B CUR
is implementation-dependent,
but each
.I \%term\%info
library defines these names to point
into the in-memory description of the current terminal.
For example,
in
.IR \%ncurses ","
the expressions
.B tigetstr("key_dc")
and
\*(``\c\" `` string not reliable in a macro call on DWB/Heirloom nroffs
.B "CUR Strings[59]\c"
\*('' \" '' string not reliable in a macro call on DWB/Heirloom nroffs
are equivalent.
.\"
.SS "\fIterminfo\fP and \fIcurses"
\fB\%setupterm\fP(3X) initializes the lower-level
.I \%term\%info
interface.
The higher-level
.I curses
interface uses the
.I \%term\%info
interface internally;
the symbol
.B SP
bridges the
.I curses
.I SCREEN
type with the
.I \%term\%info
.I TERMINAL
type.
.\"
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses does not describe any of these symbols except for
.IR \%cur_term "."
(The inclusion of
.I \%cur_term
appears to be an oversight,
since other comparable low-level information is omitted by X/Open.)
.PP
Other implementations may have comparable variables.
Some implementations provide the variables in their libraries,
but omit them from the header files.
.PP
All implementations that provide
.I \%term\%info
interfaces add definitions
as described in the
.RI \*(`` terminfo
Names\*('' section above.
Most,
but not all,
base the definition upon the
.I \%cur_term
variable.
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_terminfo\fP(3X),
\fB\%curs_threads\fP(3X),
\fB\%terminfo\fP(5)
