.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2024,2025 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2016,2017 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" $Id: tic.1m,v 1.128 2025/11/12 00:49:19 tom Exp $
.TH @TIC@ 1M 2025-11-11 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "User commands"
.ie \n(.g \{\
.ds `` \(lq
.ds '' \(rq
.\}
.el \{\
.ie t .ds `` ``
.el   .ds `` ""
.ie t .ds '' ''
.el   .ds '' ""
.\}
.
.de bP
.ie n  .IP \(bu 4
.el    .IP \(bu 2
..
.
.SH NAME
\fB\%@TIC@\fP \-
compile terminal descriptions for \%\fIterm\%info\fR or \fItermcap\fR
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB@TIC@\fP
[\fB\-\
0\
1\
a\
c\
C\
D\
f\
g\
G\
I\
K\
L\
N\
q\
r\
s\
t\
T\
U\
V\
W\
x\
\fP]
[\fB\-e\fP \fIterminal-type-list\fP]
[\fB\-o\fP \fIdir\fP]
[\fB\-Q\fP[\fIn\fP]]
[\fB\-R\fP \fIsubset\fP]
[\fB\-v\fP[\fIn\fP]]
[\fB\-w\fP[\fIn\fP]]
\fIfile\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B \%@TIC@
translates a
.I \%term\%info
file from source format
into the compiled format
used by the
\fB\%ncurses\fP(3X)
library.
.PP
As described in \fBterm\fP(5),
the database may be either a directory tree
(one file per terminal entry)
or a hashed database
(one record per entry).
The
.B \%@TIC@
command writes only one type of entry,
depending on how it was built.
.bP
For directory trees,
the top-level directory,
such as
.IR \%/usr/share/terminfo ","
specifies the location of the database.
.bP
For hashed databases, a filename is needed.
If the given file is not found by that name,
but can be found by adding the suffix \*(``.db\*('',
then that is used.
.IP
The default name for the hashed database is the same as the
default directory name (only adding a \*(``.db\*('' suffix).
.PP
In either case (directory or hashed database),
.B \%@TIC@
will create the container if it does not exist.
For a directory, this would be the \*(``terminfo\*('' leaf,
versus a
.I terminfo.db
file.
.PP
The results are normally placed
in the system
.I \%term\%info
database
.IR \%@TERMINFO@ "."
The compiled terminal description can be placed
in a different
.I \%term\%info
database.
There are two ways to achieve this:
.bP
First, you may override the system default either by
using the \fB\-o\fP option,
or by setting the variable \fI\%TERMINFO\fP
in the process environment to a valid database location.
.bP
Secondly, if
.B \%@TIC@
cannot write in
.I \%@TERMINFO@
or the location specified using your
.I \%TERMINFO
variable,
it looks for the directory
.I \%$HOME/.terminfo
(or hashed database
.IR $HOME/.terminfo.db );
if that location exists, the entry is placed there.
.PP
Libraries that read
.I \%term\%info
entries are expected to check in succession
.bP
a location specified by the
.I \%TERMINFO
environment variable,
.bP
.IR \%$HOME/.terminfo ","
.bP
directories listed in the
.I \%TERMINFO_DIRS
environment variable,
.bP
a compiled-in list of directories
.RI \%( @TERMINFO_DIRS@ ),
and
.bP
the system
.I \%term\%info
database
.RI \%( @TERMINFO@ ).
.PP
Section \*(``Fetching Compiled Descriptions\*('' in \fBterminfo\fP(5)
goes into further detail.
.SS Aliases
.B \%@TIC@
is the same program as
.B \%@INFOTOCAP@
and
.BR \%@CAPTOINFO@ ";"
usually those are linked to,
or copied from, this program.
.bP
When invoked as
.BR \%@INFOTOCAP@ ","
.B \%@TIC@
sets the
.B \-I
option.
.bP
When invoked as
.BR \%@CAPTOINFO@ ","
.B \%@TIC@
sets the
.B \-C
option.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-0
restricts the output to a single line.
.TP
.B \-1
restricts the output to a single column.
.TP
.B \-a
tells
.B \%@TIC@
to retain commented-out capabilities rather than discarding them.
Capabilities are commented by prefixing them with a period.
.B \-a
implies
.BR \-x ","
because
.B \%@TIC@
treats the commented-out entries as user-defined names.
If the source is in
.I termcap
format,
.B \%@TIC@
accepts the 2-character names required by version 6.
.\" TD added this comment in 2003, prompted by discussion with Don Libes.
.\" Quoting from SunOS 4.1.3 termcap(5):
.\"	Each  termcap  entry consist of a number of colon-separated (:) fields.
.\"	The first field for each terminal lists the various names by  which  it
.\"	is  known, separated by bar ( | ) characters.  The first name is always
.\"	two characters long, and is used by older (version  6)  systems  (which
.\"	store  the  terminal  type in a 16-bit word in a system-wide database).
.\" Version 6 sounds like Unix version 6, but termcap was introduced a few
.\" years later.  The SunOS man page was based on material in 4.2BSD.
Otherwise these are ignored.
.TP
\fB\-C\fP
Force source translation to
.I termcap
format.
Note: this option differs from the
.B \-C
option of \fB\%@INFOCMP@\fP(1M)
in that it does not merely translate capability names,
but also translates
.I \%term\%info
string capability values to
.I termcap
format.
.B \%@TIC@
leaves capabilities that are not translatable
in the entry under their
.I \%term\%info
names,
but commented out with two preceding dots.
The actual format used
incorporates some improvements for escaped characters
from
.I \%term\%info
format.
For a stricter BSD-compatible translation,
specify
.B \-K
as well.
.IP
If
.B \-C
is combined with
.BR \-c ","
.B \%@TIC@
makes additional checks,
reporting cases where
.I \%term\%info
capability values do not have an exact equivalent
in
.I termcap
syntax.
For example:
.RS
.bP
.B sgr
usually does not convert,
because
.I termcap
is unable to work with more than two parameters,
and because
.I termcap 's
language for encoding parameterized capabilities
lacks many of
.IR \%term\%info 's
arithmetic and logical operators.
.RE
.TP
.B \-c
tells
.B \%@TIC@
to perform only validation of
.I file ","
including syntax problems and invalid
.RB \*(`` use \*(''
references;
no output is produced.
If you specify
.B \-C
.RB ( \-I )
with this option,
.B \%@TIC@
warns about entries that,
after
.RB \*(`` use \*(''
resolution,
exceed 1023 (4096) bytes.
Due to a fixed buffer length in older
.I termcap
libraries,
as well as buggy checking of the buffer length
(and a documented limit in
.IR \%term\%info ),
these entries may cause core dumps
with other implementations.
.IP
.B \%@TIC@
checks string capabilities
to ensure that those with parameters are valid expressions.
It validates only standard string capabilities,
ignoring those defined with the
.B \-x
option.
.TP
\fB\-D\fP
tells
.B \%@TIC@
to print the database locations that it knows about, and exit.
The first location shown is the one to which it would write compiled
terminal descriptions.
If
.B \%@TIC@
is not able to find a writable database location
according to the rules summarized above,
it will print a diagnostic and exit with an error rather than
printing a list of database locations.
.TP
\fB\-e \fIlist\fR
Limit writes and translations to the comma-separated \fIlist\fP of
terminal types.
If any name or alias of a terminal matches one of the names in
the list, the entry will be written or translated as normal.
Otherwise no output will be generated for it.
The option value is interpreted as a file containing the list if it
contains a '/'.
(Note: depending on how
.B \%@TIC@
was compiled,
this option may require \fB\-I\fP or \fB\-C\fP.)
.TP
\fB\-f\fP
Display complex terminfo strings which contain if/then/else/endif expressions
indented for readability.
.TP
\fB\-G\fP
Display constant literals in decimal form
rather than their character equivalents.
.TP
\fB\-g\fP
Display constant character literals in quoted form
rather than their decimal equivalents.
.TP
\fB\-I\fP
Force source translation to terminfo format.
.TP
\fB\-K\fP
Suppress some longstanding \fI\%ncurses\fP extensions to termcap format,
e.g., "\es" for space.
.TP
\fB\-L\fP
Force source translation to terminfo format
using the long C variable names listed in <\fBterm.h\fP>
.TP
\fB\-N\fP
Disable smart defaults.
Normally, when translating from termcap to terminfo, the compiler makes
a number of assumptions about the defaults of string capabilities
\fBreset1_string\fP, \fBcarriage_return\fP, \fBcursor_left\fP,
\fBcursor_down\fP, \fBscroll_forward\fP, \fBtab\fP, \fBnewline\fP,
\fBkey_backspace\fP, \fBkey_left\fP, and \fBkey_down\fP, then attempts
to use obsolete termcap capabilities to deduce correct values.
It also
normally suppresses output of obsolete termcap capabilities such as \fBbs\fP.
This option forces a more literal translation that also preserves the
obsolete capabilities.
.TP
\fB\-o\fIdir\fR
Write compiled entries to given database location.
Overrides the \fI\%TERMINFO\fP environment variable.
.TP
\fB\-Q\fIn\fR
Rather than show source in terminfo (text) format,
print the compiled (binary) format in hexadecimal or base64 form,
depending on the option's value:
.RS 8
.TP 3
1
hexadecimal
.TP 3
2
base64
.TP 3
3
hexadecimal and base64
.RE
.TP
\fB\-q\fP
Suppress comments and blank lines when showing translated source.
.TP
\fB\-R\fIsubset\fR
Restrict output to a given subset.
This option is for use with archaic
versions of terminfo like those on SVr1, Ultrix, or HP-UX that do not support
the full set of SVR4/XSI Curses terminfo; and outright broken ports like AIX 3.x
that have their own extensions incompatible with SVr4/XSI.
.IP
Available subsets are
.RS
\*(``SVr1\*('',
\*(``Ultrix\*('',
\*(``HP\*('',
\*(``BSD\*('', and
\*(``AIX\*(''
.RE
.IP
See \fBterminfo\fP(5) for details.
.TP
\fB\-r\fP
Force entry resolution (so there are no remaining tc capabilities) even
when doing translation to termcap format.
This may be needed if you are
preparing a termcap file for a termcap library (such as GNU termcap through
version 1.3 or BSD termcap through 4.3BSD) that does not handle multiple
tc capabilities per entry.
.TP
\fB\-s\fP
Summarize the compile by showing the database location into which entries
are written, and the number of entries which are compiled.
.TP
\fB\-T\fP
eliminates size-restrictions on the generated text.
This is mainly useful for testing and analysis, since the compiled
descriptions are limited (e.g., 1023 for termcap, 4096 for terminfo).
.TP
\fB\-t\fP
tells
.B \%@TIC@
to discard commented-out capabilities.
Normally when translating from terminfo to termcap,
untranslatable capabilities are commented-out.
.TP
\fB\-U\fP
tells
.B \%@TIC@
to not post-process the data after parsing the source file.
Normally, it infers data which is commonly missing in older terminfo data,
or in termcaps.
.TP
\fB\-V\fP
reports the version of \fI\%ncurses\fP which was used in this program,
and exits.
.TP
\fB\-v\fIn\fR
specifies that (verbose) output be written to standard error trace
information showing
.BR \%@TIC@ 's
progress.
.IP
The optional parameter \fIn\fP is a number from 1 to 9, inclusive,
indicating the desired level of detail of information.
.RS
.bP
If \fI\%ncurses\fP is built without tracing support,
the optional parameter is ignored.
.bP
If \fIn\fP is omitted, the default level is 1.
.bP
If \fIn\fP is specified and greater than 1, the level of
detail is increased, and the output is written (with tracing information)
to the \*(``trace\*('' file.
.RE
.RS
.PP
The debug flag levels are as follows:
.TP 4
1
Names of files created and linked
.TP
2
Information related to the \*(``use\*('' facility
.TP
3
Statistics from the hashing algorithm
.TP
4
Details of extended capabilities
.TP
5
(unused)
.TP
6
(unused)
.TP
7
Entries into the string-table
.TP
8
List of tokens encountered by scanner
.TP
9
All values computed in construction of the hash table
.RE
.TP
\fB\-W\fP
By itself, the \fB\-w\fP option will not force long strings to be wrapped.
Use the \fB\-W\fP option to do this.
.IP
If you specify both \fB\-f\fP and \fB\-W\fP options,
the latter is ignored when \fB\-f\fP has already split the line.
.TP
\fB\-w\fIn\fR
specifies the width of the output.
The parameter is optional.
If it is omitted, it defaults to 60.
.TP
\fB\-x\fP
Treat unknown capabilities as user-defined (see \fBuser_caps\fP(5)).
That is, if you supply a capability name which
.B \%@TIC@
does not recognize,
it will infer its type (Boolean, number or string) from the syntax and
make an extended table entry for that.
User-defined capability strings
whose name begins with \*(``k\*('' are treated as function keys.
.SS Parameters
.TP
.I file
contains one or more
.I \%term\%info
terminal descriptions in source format; see \fBterminfo\fP(5).
Each description in the file
describes the capabilities of a particular terminal type.
.IP
If
.I file
is \*(``\-\*('',
the data are read from the standard input stream.
The
.I file
parameter may also be the path of a character device.
.SS Processing
\fBterminfo\fP(5) documents all but one of the capabilities
recognized by
.BR \%@TIC@ "."
The exception is the
.B use
capability,
which enables a terminal type description to incorporate others
by reference.
.PP
.B \%@TIC@
serially reads and compiles terminal type descriptions;
at any given time,
the program compiles at most one
.I current
entry.
.\" That is, tic doesn't recursively compile entries to resolve "use=".
When
.B \%@TIC@
encounters a
.BI use= entry-name
field in the current entry,
it reads the compiled description of
.I entry-name
from
.I \%@TERMINFO@
to complete the current entry.
If
.B \%@TIC@
has already compiled a description of
.I entry-name
preceding the current entry in
.IR file ","
.B \%@TIC@
uses it preferentially.
.\" XXX: Check this--tic doesn't read ahead in or index the input file,
.\" does it?  Otherwise this feature would break when reading from a
.\" pipe.  --GBR
.B \%@TIC@
duplicates the capabilities in
.I entry-name
for the current entry,
excepting those that the current entry explicitly defines.
The foregoing has implications for capability cancellation.
When
.I entry-1
declares
.RB \*(`` use=\c
.IR entry-2 \*(``,
any canceled capabilities in
.I entry-2
must also appear in
.I entry-1
prior to
.RB \*(`` use=\c
.IR entry-2 \*(``
for these capabilities to be canceled in
.IR entry-1 "."
.PP
Compiled entries cannot exceed
4096 bytes in the legacy storage format,
or
32768 using the extended number format.
The name field cannot
exceed 512 bytes.
Terminal names exceeding the maximum alias length
(32 characters on systems with long filenames, 14 characters otherwise)
will be truncated to the maximum alias length
and a warning message will be printed.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I @TERMINFO@
compiled terminal description database
.SH NOTES
There is some evidence that historic
.B \%@TIC@
implementations treated
description fields with no whitespace in them as additional aliases or
short names.
This
.B \%@TIC@
does not do that, but it does warn when
description fields may be treated that way and check them for dangerous
characters.
.SH EXTENSIONS
Unlike the SVr4
.I tic
command,
.I \%ncurses
.I tic
can compile
.I termcap
sources.
In fact,
entries in
.I \%term\%info
and
.I termcap
syntax can be mixed in a single source file.
See \fBterminfo\fP(5) for the list of
.I termcap
capability names
.I \%ncurses
.B \%@TIC@
treats as equivalent to
.I \%term\%info
names.
.PP
The SVr4 man pages are not clear on the resolution rules for
.RB \*(`` use \*(''
capabilities.
.IR ncurses 's
.B \%@TIC@
finds
.RB \*(`` use \*(''
targets anywhere in the source file,
or anywhere in the file tree rooted at the location in the
.I \%TERMINFO
environment variable
(if
.I \%TERMINFO
is defined),
or in the user's
.I \%$HOME/.terminfo
database
(if it exists),
or (finally) anywhere in the system's collection of compiled entries.
.PP
The error messages from
.I \%ncurses
.B \%@TIC@
have the same format as GNU C error messages,
and can be parsed by GNU Emacs's \*(``compile\*('' facility.
.PP
Aside from
.B \-c
and
.BR \-v ","
options are not portable.
.bP
Most of
.I \%ncurses
.BR \%@TIC@ 's
options are not supported by SVr4
.IR tic "."
.PP
.RS
.B \-0
.B \-1
.B \-C
.B \-G
.B \-I
.B \-N
.B \-R
.B \-T
.B \-V
.B \-a
.B \-e
.B \-f
.B \-g
.B \-o
.B \-r
.B \-s
.B \-t
.B \-x
.RE
.bP
NetBSD
.I tic
supports a few of the
.I \%ncurses
.B \%@TIC@
options.
.PP
.RS
.B \-a
.B \-o
.B \-x
.RE
.bP
NetBSD
.I tic
also adds
.BR \-S ","
a feature which does the same thing as
.I \%ncurses
.BR \%@INFOCMP@ 's
.B \-e
and
.B \-E
options.
.PP
SVr4
.IR tic 's
.B \-c
mode does not report bad
.RB \*(`` use \*(''
links.
.PP
SVr4 does not compile entries to
or read entries from your
.I \%$HOME/.terminfo
database unless the
.I \%TERMINFO
environment variable is explicitly set to it.
.SH PORTABILITY
X/Open Curses Issue\ 7 (2009) provides a brief description of \fBtic\fP.
It lists one option: \fB\-c\fP.
The omission of \fB\-v\fP is unexpected.
The change history states that the description is derived from Tru64.
According to its manual pages, that system also supported the \fB\-v\fP option.
.PP
Shortly after Issue\ 7 was released, Tru64 was discontinued.
As of 2019, the surviving implementations of \fBtic\fP
are SVr4 (AIX, HP-UX and Solaris),
\fI\%ncurses\fP
and NetBSD curses.
The SVr4 \fBtic\fP programs all support the \fB\-v\fP option.
The NetBSD \fBtic\fP program follows X/Open's documentation,
omitting the \fB\-v\fP option.
.PP
The X/Open rationale states that some implementations of \fBtic\fP
read terminal descriptions from the standard input if the \fIfile\fP
parameter is omitted.
None of these implementations do that.
Further, it comments that some may choose to read from \*(''./terminfo.src\*(''
but that is obsolescent behavior from SVr2,
and is not (for example) a documented feature of SVr3.
.SH HISTORY
System V Release 2 provided a \fBtic\fP utility.
It accepted a single option: \fB\-v\fP (optionally followed by a number).
According to Ross Ridge's comment in \fImytinfo\fP,
this version of \fBtic\fP was
unable to represent canceled capabilities.
.PP
System V Release 3 provided a different \fBtic\fP utility,
written by Pavel Curtis,
(originally named \*(``compile\*('' in \fIpcurses\fP).
This added an option \fB\-c\fP to check the file for
errors, with the caveat that errors in \*(``use=\*('' links
would not be reported.
System V Release 3 documented a few warning messages which
did not appear in \fIpcurses\fP.
While the program itself was changed little as development
continued with System V Release 4,
the table of capabilities grew from 180 (\fIpcurses\fP) to 464 (Solaris).
.PP
In early development of \fI\%ncurses\fP (1993),
Zeyd Ben-Halim used the table from \fImytinfo\fP to
extend the \fIpcurses\fP table to 469 capabilities
(456 matched SVr4, 8 were only in SVr4, 13 were not in SVr4).
Of those 13, 11 were ultimately discarded
(perhaps to match the draft of X/Open Curses).
The exceptions were
\fB\%memory_lock_above\fP and
\fB\%memory_unlock\fP (see \fB\%user_caps\fP(5)).
.PP
Eric Raymond incorporated parts of \fImytinfo\fP into \fI\%ncurses\fP
to implement the termcap-to-terminfo source conversion,
and extended that to begin development of
the corresponding terminfo-to-termcap source conversion,
Thomas Dickey completed that development over the course of several years.
.PP
In 1999, Thomas Dickey added the \fB\-x\fP option
to support user-defined capabilities.
.PP
In 2010, Roy Marples provided a \fBtic\fP program
and terminfo library for NetBSD.
That implementation adapts several features from \fI\%ncurses\fP,
including
.BR \%@TIC@ 's
\fB\-x\fP option.
.PP
The \fB\-c\fP option tells
.B \%@TIC@
to check for problems in the
terminfo source file.
Continued development provides additional checks:
.bP
.I pcurses
had 8 warnings.
.bP
.I \%ncurses
in 1996 had 16 warnings.
.bP
Solaris (SVr4)
.I curses
has 28 warnings.
.bP
NetBSD
.I tic
in 2019 has 19 warnings.
.bP
.I \%ncurses
in 2019 has 96 warnings.
.PP
The checking done in
.IR \%ncurses 's
.B \%@TIC@
helps with the
conversion to termcap,
as well as pointing out errors and inconsistencies.
It is also used to ensure consistency with the user-defined capabilities.
There are 527 distinct capabilities in
.IR \%ncurses 's
terminal database;
128 of those are user-defined.
.SH AUTHORS
Eric S. Raymond <esr@snark.thyrsus.com>
and
.br
Thomas E. Dickey <dickey@invisible\-island.net>
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%@CAPTOINFO@\fP(1M),
\fB\%@INFOCMP@\fP(1M),
\fB\%@INFOTOCAP@\fP(1M),
\fB\%@TOE@\fP(1M),
\fB\%curses\fP(3X),
\fB\%term\fP(5),
\fB\%terminfo\fP(5),
\fB\%user_caps\fP(5)
