.\"***************************************************************************
.\" Copyright 2018-2023,2024 Thomas E. Dickey                                *
.\" Copyright 1998-2010,2015 Free Software Foundation, Inc.                  *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a  *
.\" copy of this software and associated documentation files (the            *
.\" "Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including      *
.\" without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,      *
.\" distribute, distribute with modifications, sublicense, and/or sell       *
.\" copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is    *
.\" furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:                 *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included  *
.\" in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.                   *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS  *
.\" OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF               *
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.   *
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ABOVE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM,   *
.\" DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR    *
.\" OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR    *
.\" THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.                               *
.\"                                                                          *
.\" Except as contained in this notice, the name(s) of the above copyright   *
.\" holders shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the     *
.\" sale, use or other dealings in this Software without prior written       *
.\" authorization.                                                           *
.\"***************************************************************************
.\"
.\" Author: Thomas E. Dickey 1996
.\"
.\" $Id: wresize.3x,v 1.36 2024/03/16 15:35:01 tom Exp $
.TH wresize 3X 2024-03-16 "ncurses @NCURSES_MAJOR@.@NCURSES_MINOR@" "Library calls"
.SH NAME
\fB\%wresize\fP \-
resize a \fIcurses\fR window
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <curses.h>
.PP
\fBint wresize(WINDOW *\fIwin\fP, int \fIlines\fP, int \fIcolumns\fP);
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
This \fI\%ncurses\fP extension to standard \fIcurses\fP reallocates
storage for a \fIcurses\fP window to adjust its dimensions to the
specified values.
If either dimension is larger than its current value,
the expanded part of the window is filled with blanks merged with
current background rendition
(as set by \fB\%wbkgdset\fP(3X)).
.SH RETURN VALUE
\fB\%wresize\fP returns \fBERR\fP upon failure and \fBOK\fP on success.
It will fail if either of the dimensions is less than or equal to zero,
or if an error occurs while (re)allocating memory for the window.
.SH NOTES
The only restriction placed on the dimensions is that they be greater
than zero.
They are \fInot\fP compared to the \fIcurses\fP screen dimensions;
this keeps the logic of \fB\%resizeterm\fP(3X) simple.
The caller must ensure that the window's dimensions fit within the
actual screen dimensions.
.SH PORTABILITY
It is not possible to resize windows with SVr4 \fIcurses\fP.
.PP
\fI\%ncurses\fP introduced this extension in mid-1995.
NetBSD \fIcurses\fP adopted it in 2001,
and \fI\%PDCurses\fP in 2003.
.SH AUTHORS
Thomas Dickey
(from an equivalent function written in 1988 for BSD \fIcurses\fP).
.SH SEE ALSO
\fB\%resizeterm\fP(3X)
