.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	@(#)mpool.3	8.1 (Berkeley) 6/4/93
.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"
.TH MPOOL 3 "June 4, 1993"
.UC 7
.SH NAME
mpool \- shared memory buffer pool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.ft B
#include <db.h>
#include <mpool.h>

MPOOL *
mpool_open (DBT *key, int fd, pgno_t pagesize, pgno_t maxcache);

void
mpool_filter (MPOOL *mp, void (*pgin)(void *, pgno_t, void *),
.ti +5
void (*pgout)(void *, pgno_t, void *), void *pgcookie);

void *
mpool_new (MPOOL *mp, pgno_t *pgnoaddr);

void *
mpool_get (MPOOL *mp, pgno_t pgno, u_int flags);

int
mpool_put (MPOOL *mp, void *pgaddr, u_int flags);

int
mpool_sync (MPOOL *mp);

int
mpool_close (MPOOL *mp);
.ft R
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
.IR Mpool
is the library interface intended to provide page oriented buffer management
of files.
The buffers may be shared between processes.
.PP
The function
.I mpool_open
initializes a memory pool.
The
.I key
argument is the byte string used to negotiate between multiple
processes wishing to share buffers.
If the file buffers are mapped in shared memory, all processes using
the same key will share the buffers.
If
.I key
is NULL, the buffers are mapped into private memory.
The
.I fd
argument is a file descriptor for the underlying file, which must be seekable.
If
.I key
is non-NULL and matches a file already being mapped, the
.I fd
argument is ignored.
.PP
The
.I pagesize
argument is the size, in bytes, of the pages into which the file is broken up.
The
.I maxcache
argument is the maximum number of pages from the underlying file to cache
at any one time.
This value is not relative to the number of processes which share a file's
buffers, but will be the largest value specified by any of the processes
sharing the file.
.PP
The
.I mpool_filter
function is intended to make transparent input and output processing of the
pages possible.
If the
.I pgin
function is specified, it is called each time a buffer is read into the memory
pool from the backing file.
If the
.I pgout
function is specified, it is called each time a buffer is written into the
backing file.
Both functions are called with the
.I pgcookie
pointer, the page number and a pointer to the page to being read or written.
.PP
The function
.I mpool_new
takes an MPOOL pointer and an address as arguments.
If a new page can be allocated, a pointer to the page is returned and
the page number is stored into the
.I pgnoaddr
address.
Otherwise, NULL is returned and errno is set.
.PP
The function
.I mpool_get
takes a MPOOL pointer and a page number as arguments.
If the page exists, a pointer to the page is returned.
Otherwise, NULL is returned and errno is set.
The flags parameter is not currently used.
.PP
The function
.I mpool_put
unpins the page referenced by
.IR pgaddr .
.I Pgaddr
must be an address previously returned by
.I mpool_get
or
.IR mpool_new .
The flag value is specified by
.IR or 'ing
any of the following values:
.TP
MPOOL_DIRTY
The page has been modified and needs to be written to the backing file.
.PP
.I Mpool_put
returns 0 on success and -1 if an error occurs.
.PP
The function
.I mpool_sync
writes all modified pages associated with the MPOOL pointer to the
backing file.
.I Mpool_sync
returns 0 on success and -1 if an error occurs.
.PP
The
.I mpool_close
function free's up any allocated memory associated with the memory pool
cookie.
Modified pages are
.B not
written to the backing file.
.I Mpool_close
returns 0 on success and -1 if an error occurs.
.SH ERRORS
The
.I mpool_open
function may fail and set
.I errno
for any of the errors specified for the library routine
.IR malloc (3).
.PP
The
.I mpool_get
function may fail and set
.I errno
for the following:
.TP 15
[EINVAL]
The requested record doesn't exist.
.PP
The
.I mpool_new
and
.I mpool_get
functions may fail and set
.I errno
for any of the errors specified for the library routines
.IR read (2) ,
.IR write (2) ,
and
.IR malloc (3).
.PP
The
.I mpool_sync
function may fail and set
.I errno
for any of the errors specified for the library routine
.IR write (2).
.PP
The
.I mpool_close
function may fail and set
.I errno
for any of the errors specified for the library routine
.IR free (3).
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.IR dbopen (3),
.IR btree (3),
.IR hash (3),
.IR recno (3)
