OS Default Dynamic Device Personalization (DDP) Package
*******************************************************

August 09, 2024


Contents
^^^^^^^^

* OS Default Dynamic Device Personalization (DDP) Package

  * Overview

  * Supported Operating Systems

  * Contents of This Package

  * Related Documentation

  * Notes

  * Installation

  * Troubleshooting

  * Legal / Disclaimers


Overview
========

Devices based on the Intel(R) Ethernet 800 Series require a Dynamic
Device Personalization (DDP) package file to enable advanced features
(such as dynamic tunneling, Intel(R) Ethernet Flow Director, RSS, and
ADQ).

DDP allows you to change the packet processing pipeline of a device by
applying a profile package to the device at runtime. Profiles can be
used to, for example, add support for new protocols, change existing
protocols, or change default settings. DDP profiles can also be rolled
back without rebooting the system.

The DDP package loads during device initialization or driver runtime,
depending on the operating system. The driver checks to see if the DDP
package is present and compatible. If this file exists, the driver
will load it into the device. If the DDP package file is missing or
incompatible with the driver, the driver will go into Safe Mode where
it will use the configuration contained in the device's NVM.

Safe Mode disables advanced and performance features, and supports
only basic traffic and minimal functionality, such as updating the NVM
or downloading a new driver or DDP package.

Refer to the Intel(R) Ethernet Adapters and Devices User Guide for
more details on DDP and Safe Mode.

A general-purpose, default DDP package is automatically installed with
all supported Intel Ethernet 800 Series drivers on supported operating
systems. Additional DDP packages are available to address needs for
specific market segments or targeted solutions.

The default DDP package supports the following:

* MAC

* EtherType

* VLAN

* IPv4

* IPv6

* TCP

* ARP

* UDP

* SCTP

* ICMP

* ICMPv6

* CTRL

* LLDP

* VXLAN-GPE

* VXLAN (non-GPE)

* Geneve

* GRE

* NVGRE

* RoCEv2

* MPLS (up to 5 consecutive MPLS labels in the outermost Layer 2
  header group)


Supported Operating Systems
===========================

This DDP package is supported on the following operating systems:

* Microsoft* Windows Server*

* Linux*

* FreeBSD*

* VMware* ESXi*

Refer to the Intel(R) Ethernet Adapters and Devices User Guide for
currently supported versions of these operating systems.


Related Documentation
=====================

See the "Intel(R) Ethernet Adapters and Devices User Guide" for
additional information on features:

* https://cdrdv2.intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/705831/

Additionally, a detailed technology guide is available for this DDP
package:

* https://cdrdv2.intel.com/v1/dl/getContent/617015


Notes
=====

* In Linux, FreeBSD, and Windows, you cannot update the DDP package if
  any PF drivers are already loaded. To overwrite a package, unload
  all PFs and then reload the driver with the new package.

* In FreeBSD and Windows, you can only use one DDP package per driver,
  even if you have more than one device installed that uses the
  driver.

* In Linux, FreeBSD, and Windows, only the first loaded PF per device
  can download a package for that device. In ESXi, you can load
  different DDP packages for different PFs associated with a device.

* If you are using DPDK, see the DPDK documentation at
  https://www.dpdk.org/ for installation instructions and more
  information.


Troubleshooting
===============


FreeBSD
-------

If you encounter issues with the DDP package file, you may need to
download an updated driver or ice_ddp module. See the log messages for
more information.


Legal / Disclaimers
===================

Copyright (c) 2019 - 2024, Intel Corporation.

Intel technologies may require enabled hardware, software or service
activation.

No product or component can be absolutely secure.

Your costs and results may vary.

Intel, the Intel logo, and other Intel marks are trademarks of Intel
Corporation or its subsidiaries.  Other names and brands may be
claimed as the property of others.

Performance varies by use, configuration, and other factors. Learn
more at https://www.Intel.com/PerformanceIndex.

The products described may contain design defects or errors known as
errata which may cause the product to deviate from published
specifications. Current characterized errata are available on request.

This software and the related documents are Intel copyrighted
materials, and your use of them is governed by the express license
under which they were provided to you ("License"). Unless the License
provides otherwise, you may not use, modify, copy, publish,
distribute, disclose or transmit this software or the related
documents without Intel's prior written permission.

This software and the related documents are provided as is, with no
express or implied warranties, other than those that are expressly
stated in the License.
