.\"-
.\" Copyright 2006 Colin Percival
.\" All rights reserved
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted providing that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 30, 2006
.Dt FREEBSD-UPDATE.CONF 5
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm freebsd-update.conf
.Nd configuration file for
.Xr freebsd-update 8
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file controls the behaviour of the
.Xr freebsd-update 8
utility.
The file contains lines consisting of a case-sensitive option name and
zero or more parameters.
Empty lines and any part of a line following a
.Ql #
character are ignored.
Unless stated otherwise, specifying an option multiple times is an
error.
.Pp
The possible options and their meanings are as follows:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "KeepModifiedMetadata"
.It Cm KeyPrint
The single parameter following this keyword is the SHA256 hash
of the RSA key which will be trusted to sign updates.
.It Cm ServerName
The single parameter following this keyword is the name of the
server or server pool from which updates will be downloaded.
.It Cm Components
The parameters following this keyword are the components or
sub-components of
.Fx
which will be updated.
The components are
.Dq src
(source code),
.Dq world
(non-kernel binaries), and
.Dq kernel ;
the sub-components are the individual distribution sets generated as
part of the release process (e.g.,
.Dq src/base ,
.Dq src/sys ,
.Dq world/base ,
.Dq world/catpages ,
.Dq kernel/smp ) .
Note that prior to
.Fx 6.1 ,
the
.Dq kernel
component was distributed as part of
.Dq world/base .
.Pp
This option can be specified multiple times, and the parameters
accumulate.
.It Cm IgnorePaths
The parameters following this keyword are regular expressions;
updates to paths which start with a string matching one of
these regular expressions will be ignored.
.Pp
This option can be specified multiple times, and the parameters
accumulate.
.It Cm UpdateIfUnmodified
The parameters following this keyword are regular expressions;
updates to paths which start with a string matching one of
these regular expressions will be ignored if the files have
been modified locally (unless they are merged -- see MergeChanges
below).
.Pp
This option can be specified multiple times, and the parameters
accumulate.
.It Cm MergeChanges
The parameters following this keyword are regular expressions;
updates to paths which start with a string matching one of
these regular expressions will be merged with local modifications.
.Pp
This option can be specified multiple times, and the parameters
accumulate.
.It Cm WorkDir
The single parameter following this keyword is the directory
in which temporary files and downloaded updates will be stored.
.It Cm MailTo
The single parameter following this keyword is the address
to which
.Cm cron
output will be mailed.
.It Cm AllowAdd
The single parameter following this keyword must be
.Dq yes
or
.Dq no
and specifies whether
.Cm freebsd-update
is allowed to create new files, directories, and symlinks if
these are part of updates downloaded.
Note that
.Cm freebsd-update
will not re-add files which have been deleted from a
.Fx
installation unless those files were previously added as part
of an update.
.It Cm AllowDelete
The single parameter following this keyword must be
.Dq yes
or
.Dq no
and specifies whether
.Cm freebsd-update
is allowed to delete files, directories, and symlinks as
part of updates downloaded.
.It Cm KeepModifiedMetadata
The single parameter following this keyword must be
.Dq yes
or
.Dq no
and specifies whether
.Cm freebsd-update
should keep existing file ownership, permissions, and flags
when installing updates if these have been modified locally.
.It Cm StrictComponents
The single parameter following this keyword must be
.Dq yes
or
.Dq no
and specifies whether
.Cm freebsd-update
should interpret the list of components of
.Fx
specified via the
.Cm Components
option strictly as a list of components installed which
should be upgraded when the
.Cm upgrade
command is used ("yes"), or merely as a list of components
which might be installed, of which
.Cm freebsd-update
should identify which in fact are present ("no").
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/etc/freebsd-update.conf"
.It /etc/freebsd-update.conf
Default location of the
.Cm freebsd-update
configuration file.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sha256 1 ,
.Xr freebsd-update 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Colin Percival Aq cperciva@FreeBSD.org
