.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause-FreeBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\"
.\" This software was developed by BFF Storage Systems, LLC under sponsorship
.\" from the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd April 13, 2019
.Dt FUSEFS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fusefs
.Nd "File system in USErspace"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To link into the kernel:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options FUSEFS"
.Ed
.Pp
To load as a loadable kernel module:
.Pp
.Dl "kldload fusefs"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver implements a file system that is serviced by a userspace program.
.Pp
There are many uses for
.Nm .
Userspace daemons can access libraries or programming languages that cannot run
in kernel-mode, for example.
.Nm
is also useful for developing and debugging file systems, because a crash of
the daemon will not take down the entire operating system.
Finally, the
.Nm
API is portable.
Many daemons can run on multiple operating systems with minimal modifications.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va vfs.fusefs.kernelabi_major
Major version of the FUSE kernel ABI supported by this driver.
.It Va vfs.fusefs.kernelabi_minor
Minor version of the FUSE kernel ABI supported by this driver.
.It Va vfs.fusefs.data_cache_mode
Controls how
.Nm
will cache file data.
A value of 0 will disable caching entirely.
Every data access will be forwarded to the daemon.
A value of 1 will select write-through caching.
Reads will be cached in the VFS layer as usual.
Writes will be immediately forwarded to the daemon, and also added to the cache.
A value of 2 will select write-back caching.
Reads and writes will both be cached, and writes will occasionally be flushed
to the daemon by the page daemon.
Write-back caching is usually unsafe, especially for FUSE file systems that
require network access.
.It Va vfs.fusefs.lookup_cache_enable
Controls whether
.Nm
will cache lookup responses from the file system.
FUSE file systems indicate whether lookup responses should be cacheable, but
it may be useful to globally disable caching them if a file system is
misbehaving.
.\" Undocumented sysctls
.\" ====================
.\" Counters: I intend to rename to vfs.fusefs.stats.* for clarity
.\" vfs.fusefs.lookup_cache_{hits, misses}
.\" vfs.fusefs.filehandle_count
.\" vfs.fusefs.ticker_count
.\" vfs.fusefs.node_count
.\"
.\" vfs.fusefs.version - useless since the driver moved in-tree
.\" vfs.fusefs.reclaim_revoked: I don't understand it well-enough
.\" vfs.fusefs.sync_unmount: dead code
.\" vfs.fusefs.enforce_dev_perms: I don't understand it well enough.
.\" vfs.fusefs.init_backgrounded: dead code
.\" vfs.fusefs.iov_credit: I don't understand it well enough
.\" vfs.fusefs.iov_permanent_bufsize: I don't understand it well enough
.\" vfs.fusefs.fix_broken_io: I don't understand it well enough
.\" vfs.fusefs.sync_resize: useless and should be removed
.\" vfs.fusefs.refresh_size: probably useless?
.\" vfs.fusefs.mmap_enable: why is this optional?
.\" vfs.fusefs.data_cache_invalidate: what is this needed for?
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mount_fusefs 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm fuse
driver was written as the part of the
.Fx
implementation of the FUSE userspace file system framework (see
.Xr https://github.com/libfuse/libfuse )
and first appeared in the
.Pa sysutils/fusefs-kmod
port, supporting
.Fx 6.0 .
It was added to the base system in
.Fx 10.0 ,
and renamed to
.Nm
for
.Fx 12.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm fuse
driver was originally written by
.An Csaba Henk
as a Google Summer of Code project in 2005.
It was further developed by
.An Ilya Putsikau
during Google Summer of Code 2011, and that version was integrated into the
base system by
.An Attilio Rao Aq Mt attilio@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Alan Somers Aq Mt asomers@FreeBSD.org .
