.\" Copyright (c) 1980, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     From: @(#)group.5	8.3 (Berkeley) 4/19/94
.\"	$Id: group.5,v 1.3 1996/06/30 16:09:51 wosch Exp $
.\"
.Dd September 29, 1994
.Dt GROUP 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm group
.Nd format of the group permissions file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Aq Pa /etc/group
consists of newline separated
.Tn ASCII
records, one per group, containing four colon
.Ql \&:
separated fields. These fields are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width password -offset indent -compact
.It group
Name of the group.
.It passwd
Group's
.Em encrypted
password.
.It gid
The group's decimal ID.
.It member
Group members.
.El
.Pp
The
.Ar group
field is the group name used for granting file access to users
who are members of the group.
The
.Ar gid
field is the number associated with the group name.
They should both be unique across the system (and often
across a group of systems) since they control file access.
The
.Ar passwd
field
is an optional
.Em encrypted
password.
This field is rarely used
and an asterisk is normally placed in it rather than leaving it blank.
The 
.Ar member
field contains the names of users granted the privileges of
.Ar group .
The member names are separated by commas without spaces or newlines.
A user is automatically in a group if that group was specified
in their
.Pa /etc/passwd
entry and does not need to be added to that group in the
.Pa /etc/group file.
.\" .Pp
.\" When the system reads the file
.\" .Pa /etc/group
.\" the fields are read into the structure
.\" .Fa group
.\" declared in
.\" .Aq Pa grp.h :
.\" .Bd -literal -offset indent
.\" struct group {
.\"	char    *gr_name;        /* group name */
.\"	char    *gr_passwd;      /* group password */
.\"	int     gr_gid;          /* group id */
.\"	char    **gr_mem;        /* group members */
.\" };
.\" .Ed
.Sh YP/NIS INTERACTION
The
.Pa /etc/group
file can be configured to enable the YP/NIS group database.
An entry whose
.Ar name
field consists of a plus sign (`+') followed by a group name, will be
replaced internally to the C library with the YP/NIS group entry for the
named group.  An entry whose
.Ar name
field consists of a single plus sign with no group name following,
will be replaced with the entire YP/NIS
.Dq Li group.byname
map.
.Pp
If the YP/NIS group database is enabled for any reason, all reverse
lookups (i.e.,
.Fn getgrgid )
will use the entire database, even if only a few groups are enabled.
Thus, the group name returned by
.Fn getgrgid
is not guaranteed to have a valid forward mapping.
.Sh LIMITS
A group cannot have more than 200 members. The maximum line
length of
.Pa /etc/group
is 1024 characters. Longer lines will be skiped.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/group -compact
.It Pa /etc/group
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypt 3 ,
.Xr getgrent 3 ,
.Xr initgroups 3 ,
.Xr passwd 1 ,
.Xr passwd 5 ,
.Xr setgroups 2 ,
.Xr yp 4
.Sh BUGS
The
.Xr passwd 1
command does not change the
.Nm group
passwords.
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
file format appeared in
.At v6 .
The YP/NIS functionality is modeled after
.Tn SunOS
and first appeared in
.Tn FreeBSD
1.1.
