.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Giorgos Keramidas <keramida@freebsd.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" Note: The date here should be updated whenever a non-trivial
.\" change is made to the manual page.
.Dd December 6, 2001
.Dt HOST.CONF 5
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm host.conf
.Nd resolver services configuration file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Pa /etc/host.conf
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file holds part of the configuration for the resolver of
.Fx .
It describes what services (eg. DNS or
.Xr yp 8 )
the C library resolving routines
(like
.Xr gethostbyname 3 )
will use, and their order of use, when resolving host names or addresses.
.Pp
The format of this file is human readable, and easy to modify with the
text editor of your choise.  Lines with
.Ql #
in the first column, are comments and are ignored.
The rest of the lines may contain any number of service names,
separated by any number of colons
.Pq Ql \&: ,
semicolons
.Pq Ql \&; ,
commas
.Pq Ql \&, ,
or whitespace (tab, space and newline characters).
.Ss Valid Service Names
Service names that are recognized as valid in
.Nm
are:
.Bl -tag -width "yellowpages"
.It /etc/hosts
An alias for
.Ql hosts .
.It bind
This service makes the resolver use Internet Domain System (DNS) for
resolving hostnames and addresses.  The DNS resolver configuration is
described in
.Xr resolver 5 .
.It dns
An alias for
.Ql bind .
.It domain
An alias for
.Ql bind .
.It hosts
When this service name is used in
.Nm ,
name and address lookups are done by using the local hosts database.
The local hosts database is described in
.Xr hosts 5 .
.It hosttable
An alias for
.Ql hosts .
.It htable
An alias for
.Ql hosts .
.It nis
When service name is used in
.Nm ,
the resolver uses YP/NIS for making lookups of hostnames and
addresses.  The YP/NIS system is described in
.Xr yp 8 .
.It yellowpages
An alias for
.Ql nis .
.It yp
An alias for
.Ql nis .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "resolv.conf"
.It Pa host.conf
The services configuration file resides in
.Pa /etc .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gethostbyname 3 ,
.Xr yp 8 ,
.Xr resolver 5 ,
.Xr hosts 5
