.\" Written by Garrett Wollman
.\" This file is in the public domain.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 6, 2006
.Dt LINSYSFS 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm linsysfs
.Nd Linux system file system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Bd -literal
linsys		/compat/linux/sys	linsysfs	rw 0 0
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Linux system file system, or
.Nm ,
emulates a subset of the Linux sys file system and is required for
the complete operation of some Linux binaries.
.Pp
The
.Nm
provides a two-level view of devices.
At the highest level, PCI devices themselves are named, according to
their bus, slot and function in the system hierachy.
PCI storage devices are listed in the scsi_host class with a device sym-link
to the PCI directories of the devices.
.Pp
Each device node is a directory containing some files and directories:
.Bl -tag -width status
.It Pa host
A place holder for storage
.Pa host
information.
.It Pa pci_id
A directory for the
.Pa pci_id
that contains either the device information or another directory structure
for a PCI bridge.
.El
.Pp
Each host node of scsi_host is a directory containing some files and directories:
.Bl -tag -width proc_name
.It Pa proc_name
The Linux registered driver name for these devices.
.It Pa device
A sym-link to the PCI
.Pa device
directory.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /compat/linux/sys/devices/pci0000:00 -compact
.It Pa /compat/linux/sys
The normal mount point for the
.Nm .
.It Pa /compat/linux/sys/class/scsi_host
The storage host node.
.It Pa /compat/linux/sys/devices/pci0000:00
The PCI device hierarchy node.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mount 2 ,
.Xr unmount 2 ,
.Xr linprocfs 5 ,
.Xr pseudofs 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
first appeared in
.Fx 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
was derived from
.Nm linprocfs
by
.An Doug Ambrisko .
This manual page was edited by
.An Doug Ambrisko ,
based on the
.Xr linprocfs 5
manual page by
.An Garrett Wollman .
