.\" Copyright (c) 2000
.\"	Mike W. Meyer
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 3, 2000
.Dt MAKE.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm make.conf
.Nd system build information
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Nm
contains settings that control the compilation of the
.Fx
sources
and ported applications.
The file
.Nm
is generally created by the system administrator when the values need
to be changed from their defaults.
.Pp
The purpose of
.Nm
is not to run commands or perform compilation actions
directly.
Instead, it is included by the
various makefiles in
.Pa /usr/src ,
.Pa /usr/ports
and
.Pa /usr/doc
which conditionalize their
internal actions according to the settings found there.
.Pp
The
.Pa /etc/make.conf
file is included from the appropriate
.Pa Makefile
which specifies the default settings for all the available options.
Options need only be specified in
.Pa /etc/make.conf
when the system administrator wishes to override these defaults.
.Pp
The build procedures occur in four broad areas: the world, the kernel,
documentations and ports.
Variables set in
.Nm
may be applicable during builds in one, two, or all four of these
areas.
They may be specified for a particular build via the
.Fl D
option of
.Xr make 1 .
.Pp
The following lists provide a name and short description for each
variable you can use during the indicated builds.
The values of
variables flagged as
.Vt bool
are ignored; the variable being
set at all (even to
.Dq Li FALSE
or
.Dq Li NO )
causes it to
be treated as if it were set.
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are used for all builds, or are used by the
.Pa makefiles
for things other than builds.
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va CFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Controls the compiler setting when compiling C code.
Optimization levels above
.Fl O
.Pq Fl O2 , No ...
are not supported.
.Va BDECFLAGS
is provided as a set of
.Xr gcc 1
settings suggested by
.An "Bruce Evans" Aq bde@FreeBSD.org
for developing and testing changes.
They can be used, if set, by:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
CFLAGS+=${BDECFLAGS}
.Ed
.It Va CVS_UPDATE
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to use
.Xr cvs 1
to update your ports with
.Dq Li "make update" .
.It Va CXXFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Controls the compiler settings when compiling C++ code.
.Va CXXFLAGS
is initially set to the value of
.Va CFLAGS .
If you want to
add to the
.Va CXXFLAGS
value, use
.Dq Li +=
instead of
.Dq Li = .
.It Va INSTALL
.Pq Vt str
the default install command.
To have commands compared before doing
the install, use
.Bd -literal -offset indent
INSTALL="install -C"
.Ed
.It Va LOCAL_DIRS
.Pq Vt str
List any directories that should be entered when doing
make's in
.Pa /usr/src
in this variable.
.It Va MTREE_FOLLOWS_SYMLINKS
.Pq Vt str
Set this to
.Dq Fl L
to cause
.Xr mtree 8
to follow symlinks.
.It Va NO_DOCUPDATE
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to not update the doc tree during
.Dq Li "make update" .
.It Va NO_PORTSUPDATE
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to not update the ports tree during
.Dq Li "make update" .
.It Va SUP_UPDATE
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to use
.Xr cvsup 1
to update your ports with
.Dq Li "make update" .
.It Va SUP
.Pq Vt str
The location of the
.Xr cvsup 1
command for
.Dq Li "make update" .
.It Va SUPFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
The flag for the
.Xr sup 1
command when doing
.Dq Li "make update" .
This defaults to
.Op Fl g L Ar 2 .
.It Va SUPHOST
.Pq Vt str
The hostname of the sup server to use when doing
.Dq Li "make update" .
.It Va SUPFILE
.Pq Vt str
The first
.Ar supfile
to use when doing a
.Dq Li "make update" .
This defaults to
.Pa /usr/share/examples/cvsup/standard\-supfile .
.It Va SUPFILE1
.Pq Vt str
The second
.Ar supfile
to use when doing a
.Dq Li "make update" .
This defaults to
.Pa /usr/share/examples/cvsup/secure\-supfile .
.It Va SUPFILE2
.Pq Vt str
The third
.Ar supfile
to use when doing a
.Dq Li "make update" .
This defaults to
.Pa /usr/share/examples/cvsup/secure\-supfile .
.It Va PORTSSUPFILE
.Pq Vt str
The ports
.Ar supfile
to use when doing a
.Dq Li "make update" .
This defaults to
.Pa /usr/share/examples/cvsup/ports\-supfile .
.It Va DOCSUPFILE
.Pq Vt str
The documentation
.Ar supfile
to use when doing a
.Dq Li "make update" .
This defaults to
.Pa /usr/share/examples/cvsup/doc\-supfile .
.It Va WARNS_WERROR
Causes -Werror to be added to
.Va CFLAGS
when WARNS is in effect.
.El
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are only used doing a kernel build:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va BOOT_COMCONSOLE_PORT
.Pq Vt str
The port address to use for the console if the boot blocks have
been configured to use a serial console instead of the keyboard/video card.
.It Va BOOT_COMCONSOLE_SPEED
.Pq Vt int
The baud rate to use for the console if the boot blocks have
been configured to use a serial console instead of the keyboard/video card.
.It Va BOOTWAIT
.Pq Vt int
Controls the amount of time the kernel waits for a console keypress
before booting the default kernel.
The value is approximately milliseconds.
Keypresses are accepted by the BIOS before booting from disk,
making it possible to give custom boot parameters even when this is
set to 0.
.It Va COPTFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Controls the compiler settings when building the
kernel.
Optimization levels above
.Oo Fl O ( O2 , No ...\& ) Oc
are not guaranteed to work.
.It Va KERNCONF
.Pq Vt str
Controls which kernel configurations will be
built by
.Dq Li "${MAKE} buildkernel"
and installed by
.Dq Li "${MAKE} installkernel" .
For example,
.Bd -literal -offset indent
KERNCONF=MINE DEBUG GENERIC OTHERMACHINE
.Ed
.Pp
will build the kernels specified by the config files
.Pa MINE , DEBUG , GENERIC ,
and
.Pa OTHERMACHINE ,
and install the kernel specified by the config file
.Pa MINE .
It defaults to
.Pa GENERIC .
.It Va NO_KERNELCONFIG
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to skip running
.Xr config 8
during
.Dq Li "${MAKE} buildkernel" .
.It Va NO_KERNELDEPEND
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to skip running
.Dq Li "${MAKE} depend"
during
.Dq Li "${MAKE} buildkernel" .
.It Va NO_MODULES
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build modules with the kernel.
.It Va MODULES_OVERRIDE
.Pq Vt str
Set to a list of modules to build instead of all of them.
.El
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are used during the world build:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va COMPAT1X
.Pq Vt bool
Set to install the
.Fx
1 compatibility libraries.
.It Va COMPAT20
.Pq Vt bool
Set to install the
.Fx 2.0
compatibility libraries.
.It Va COMPAT21
.Pq Vt bool
Set to install the
.Fx 2.1
compatibility libraries.
.It Va COMPAT22
.Pq Vt bool
Set to install the
.Fx 2.2
compatibility libraries.
.It Va COMPAT3X
.Pq Vt bool
Set to install the
.Fx
3
compatibility libraries.
.It Va COMPAT4X
.Pq Vt bool
Set to install the
.Fx
4
compatibility libraries.
.It Va ENABLE_SUIDPERL
.Pq Vt bool
Set to enable the installation of an suid
.Xr perl 1
binary.
.It Va FETCH_CMD
.Pq Vt str
Command to use to fetch files.
Normally
.Xr fetch 1 .
.It Va MAKE_IDEA
.Pq Vt bool
Set to build the IDEA encryption code.
This code is patented in the USA and many European countries.
It is
.Em "YOUR RESPONSIBILITY"
to determine if you can legally use IDEA.
.It Va MAKE_KERBEROS4
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to build KerberosIV (KTH eBones).
.It Va MAKE_KERBEROS5
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to build Kerberos5 (KTH Heimdal).
.Em WARNING !
This is still experimental code.
If you need stable Kerberos5, use the
port(s).
.It Va ENABLE_SUID_K5SU
.Pq Vt bool
Set this if you wish to use the k5su utility.  Otherwise, it will be
installed without the set-user-ID bit set.
.It Va MODULES_WITH_WORLD
.Pq Vt bool
Set to build modules with the system instead of the kernel.
.It Va NO_CVS
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build CVS.
.It Va NO_BIND
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build BIND.
.It Va NO_FORTRAN
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Xr g77 1
and related libraries.
.It Va NO_I4B
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build isdn4bsd package.
.It Va NO_IPFILTER
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build IP Filter package.
.It Va NO_LPR
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Xr lpr 1
and related programs.
.It Va NO_MAILWRAPPER
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build the
.Xr mailwrapper 8
MTA selector.
.It Va NO_MAKEDEV
.Pq Vt bool
Set to avoid running
.Dq Li "MAKEDEV all"
on
.Pa /dev
during install.
.It Va NO_OBJC
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build Objective C support.
.It Va NO_OPENSSH
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build OpenSSH.
.It Va NO_OPENSSL
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build OpenSSL (implies
.Va NO_OPENSSH ) .
.It Va NO_SENDMAIL
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Xr sendmail 8
and related programs.
.It Va NO_SHAREDOCS
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build the
.Bx 4.4
legacy docs.
.It Va NO_TCSH
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build and install
.Pa /bin/csh
(which is
.Xr tcsh 1 ) .
.It Va NO_X
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not compile in X\-Windows support (e.g.\&
.Xr doscmd 1 ) .
.It Va NOCLEAN
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to disable cleaning during
.Dq Li "make buildworld" .
This should not be set unless you know what you are doing.
.It Va NOCLEANDIR
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to run
.Dq Li "${MAKE} clean"
instead of
.Dq Li "${MAKE} cleandir" .
.It Va NOCRYPT
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build any crypto code.
.It Va NOGAMES
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build games.
.It Va NOINFO
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not make or install
.Xr info 5
files.
.It Va NOLIBC_R
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Nm libc_r
(reentrant version of
.Nm libc ) .
.It Va NOMANCOMPRESS
.Pq Vt bool
Set to install man pages uncompressed.
.It Va NOPERL
.Pq Vt bool
Set to avoid building
.Xr perl 1 .
.It Va NOPROFILE
.Pq Vt bool
Set to avoid compiling profiled libraries.
.It Va NOSECURE
.Pq Vt bool
set to not build crypto code in
.Pa secure
subdir.
.It Va NOSHARE
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build in the
.Pa share
subdir.
.It Va NOUUCP
.Pq Vt bool
Set to not build
.Xr uucp 1
related programs.
.It Va PERL_THREADED
.Pq Vt bool
Set to enable the building and installation of
.Xr perl 1
with thread
support.
.It Va PPP_NOSUID
.Pq Vt bool
Set to disable the installation of
.Xr ppp 8
as an suid root program.
.It Va SENDMAIL_MC
.Pq Vt str
The default m4 configuration file to use at install time.
The value should include the full path to the
.Pa .mc
file, e.g.,
.Pa /etc/mail/myconfig.mc .
Use with caution as a make install will overwrite any existing
.Pa /etc/mail/sendmail.cf .
Note that
.Va SENDMAIL_CF
is now deprecated.
Avoid using a value of
.Pa /etc/mail/sendmail.mc
as a buildworld will create
.Pa /etc/mail/sendmail.cf
before installworld installs an updated
.Xr sendmail 8
binary.
.It Va SENDMAIL_SUBMIT_MC
.Pq Vt str
The default m4 configuration file for mail submission
to use at install time.
The value should include the full path to the
.Pa .mc
file, e.g.,
.Pa /etc/mail/mysubmit.mc .
Use with caution as a make install will overwrite any existing
.Pa /etc/mail/submit.cf .
Avoid using a value of
.Pa /etc/mail/submit.mc
as a buildworld will create
.Pa /etc/mail/submit.cf
before installworld installs an updated
.Xr sendmail 8
binary.
.It Va SENDMAIL_ADDITIONAL_MC
.Pq Vt str
Additional
.Pa .mc
files which should be built into
.Pa .cf
files at build time.
The value should include the full path to the
.Pa .mc
file(s), e.g.,
.Pa /etc/mail/foo.mc
.Pa /etc/mail/bar.mc .
Avoid using a value of
.Pa /etc/mail/sendmail.mc
as a buildworld will create
.Pa /etc/mail/sendmail.cf
before installworld installs an updated
.Xr sendmail 8
binary.
.It Va SENDMAIL_M4_FLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Flags passed to m4 when building a
.Pa .cf
file from a
.Pa .mc
file.
.It Va SENDMAIL_CFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Flags to pass to the compile command when building
.Xr sendmail 8 .
The
.Va SENDMAIL_*
flags can be used to provide SASL support with setting such as:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
SENDMAIL_CFLAGS=-I/usr/local/include -DSASL
SENDMAIL_LDFLAGS=-L/usr/local/lib
SENDMAIL_LDADD=-lsasl
.Ed
.It Va SENDMAIL_LDFLAGS
.Pq Vt str
Flags to pass to the
.Xr ld 1
command when building
.Xr sendmail 8 .
.It Va SENDMAIL_LDADD
.Pq Vt str
Flags to add to the end of the
.Xr ld 1
command when building
.Xr sendmail 8 .
.It Va SENDMAIL_DPADD
.Pq Vt str
Extra dependencies to add when building
.Xr sendmail 8 .
.It Va SENDMAIL_SET_USER_ID
.Pq Vt bool
If set, install
.Xr sendmail 8
as a set-user-ID root binary instead of a set-group-ID binary
and do not install
.Pa /etc/mail/submit.{cf,mc} .
Use of this flag is not recommended and the alternative advice in
.Pa /etc/mail/README
should be followed instead of at all possible.
.It Va SENDMAIL_MAP_PERMS
.Pq Vt str
Mode to use when generating alias and map database files using
.Pa /etc/mail/Makefile .
The default value is 0640.
.El
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are used when building documentation.
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va DISTDIR
.Pq Vt str
Where distfiles are kept.
Normally, this is
.Pa distfiles
in
.Va PORTSDIR .
.It Va DOC_LANG
.Pq Vt str
The list of languages and encodings to build and install.
.It Va PRINTERDEVICE
.Pq Vt str
The default format for system documentation, depends on your
printer.
This can be set to
.Dq Li ascii
for simple printers or
.Dq Li ps
for postscript or graphics printers with a ghostscript
filter.
.El
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for variables
that are used when building ports:
.Bl -tag -width Ar
.It Va FORCE_PKG_REGISTER
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to override any existing package registration.
.It Va HAVE_MOTIF
.Pq Vt bool
Set this if you have Motif on your system.
.It Va KRB5_HOME
.Pq Vt str
Set this if you want to install the MIT Kerberos5 port somewhere
other than
.Pa /usr/local .
.It Va LOCALBASE
.Pq Vt str
Set this to the base directory that non\-X ports should be
installed in.
It provides the default for
.Va PREFIX
when building in
.Pa /usr/ports .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_AFTERSTEP
.Pq Vt str
Set this to change the master site for AfterStep ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_BACKUP
.Pq Vt str
Controls the site location that ports check for distfiles if the
locations listed in their
.Pa Makefile
do not work.
The last part of the path must be
.Dq Li /${DIST_SUBDIR}/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_COMP_SOURCES
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for
.Pa comp.sources
ports.
The
last part of the path must be
.Dq Li %SUBDIR%/
.It Va MASTER_SITE_GNOME
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for GNOME ports.
The
last part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/
.It Va MASTER_SITE_GNU
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for GNU ports.
The
last part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/
.It Va MASTER_SITE_KDE
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for KDE ports.
The
last part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/
.It Va MASTER_SITE_FREEBSD
.Pq Vt bool
If set, go to the master
.Fx
site for all files.
.It Va MASTER_SITE_MOZILLA
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for Mozilla ports.
The
last part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/
.It Va MASTER_SITE_OVERRIDE
.Pq Vt str
If set, this site is checked before the sites listed in the ports
.Pa Makefile .
You can have it check the backup site first by like so:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
MASTER_SITE_OVERRIDE?=	${MASTER_SITE_BACKUP}
.Ed
.It Va MASTER_SITE_PERL_CPAN
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for Perl ports.
The
last part of the path must be
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/%SUBDIR%/
.Ed
.It Va MASTER_SORT_REGEX
.Pq Vt str
Set this to control the sort order for mirror sets.
To set it to
prefer mirrors in the
.Pa .jp
domain, use:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
MASTER_SORT_REGEX?=	^file: ^ftp://ftp\.FreeBSD\.org/pub/FreeBSD/ports/local-distfiles/ ://[^/]*\.jp/ ://[^/]*\.jp\.
.Ed
.Pp
Users of other ccTLD domains should change the
.Dq Li jp
to the
appropriate domain.
.It Va MASTER_SITE_RINGSERVER
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for Ringserver ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_RUBY
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for Ruby ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_SUNSITE
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for Sunsite ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_TCLTK
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for Tcl and Tk ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_TEX_CTAN
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for TeX ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_WINDOWMAKER
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for WindowMaker ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_XCONTRIB
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for contributed X ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_XEMACS
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for Xemacs ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MASTER_SITE_XFREE
.Pq Vt str
Controls the master site location for XFree ports.
The last
part of the path must be
.Dq Li /%SUBDIR%/ .
.It Va MOTIFLIB
.Pq Vt str
Location of
.Pa libXm.a
and
.Pa libXm.so .
.It Va MOTIF_STATIC
.Pq Vt bool
Set this if you want ports that use Motif to be built so they
can be run on systems without the Motif shared libraries.
.It Va NOCLEANDEPENDS
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to prevent
.Dq Li "make clean"
from cleaning the ports that the one being cleaned depends on.
.It Va NOPORTDOCS
.Pq Vt bool
Set this to disable installing additional documentation with ports.
.It Va PACKAGES
.Pq Vt str
Used only for the package target; the directory for the package tree.
.It Va PATCH_SITES
.Pq Vt str
Primary location(s) for the distribution of patch files.
.It Va PORTSDIR
.Pq Vt str
The location of the ports tree.
.It Va USA_RESIDENT
.Pq Vt bool
Set this if you are a resident of the USA so that ports that
need to can attempt to comply with U.S. export regulations.
.It Va WITHOUT_X11
.Pq Vt bool
Set this so that ports that can be built with or without X11
support will build without X11 support by default.
.It Va WRKDIRPREFIX
.Pq Vt str
Where to create temporary files used when building ports.
.It Va X11BASE
.Pq Vt str
Should be set to where the X11 distribution has been
installed if it is installed anywhere other than
.Pa /usr/X11R6 .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/defaults/make.conf -compact
.It Pa /etc/defaults/make.conf
.It Pa /etc/make.conf
.It Pa /usr/doc/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile
.It Pa /usr/src/Makefile.inc1
.It Pa /usr/ports/Mk/bsd.port.mk
.It Pa /usr/ports/Mk/bsd.sites.mk
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gcc 1 ,
.Xr install 1 ,
.Xr make 1 ,
.Xr ports 7 ,
.Xr lpd 8 ,
.Xr sendmail 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file appeared sometime before
.Fx 4.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This
manual page was written by
.An Mike W. Meyer Aq mwm@mired.org .
.Sh BUGS
This manual page may occasionally be out of date with respect to
the options currently available for use in
.Nm .
Please check the
.Pa /etc/defaults/make.conf
file for the latest options which are available.
