.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 M. Warner Losh <imp@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 9, 2019
.Dt OS-RELEASE 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm os-release
.Nd file describing the current OS and some of its attributes
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
file is a new-line separated list of key value pairs.
The syntax of this file is a reduced
.Xr sh 1
variable assignment with the
following restrictions:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Strings cannot be concatenated together
.It
No variable expansion is done
.It
All shell special characters must be quoted as documented in
.Xr sh 1
.It
Variable assignments must be included inside of double quotes
if they contain characters outside of A-Z, a-z and 0-9
.It
All strings should be UTF-8 format
.It
Non-printable characters should not be used in the strings
.El
.Pp
Lines starting with the character
.Ql #
are ignored as comments.
.Sh VARIABLES
The following variables are defined by the standard.
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXXXXXX -compact
.It Dv NAME
A string describing the preferred OS name.
.It Dv VERSION
Version string for the OS, in its usual and customary format.
.It Dv ID
Lower case version of the name with only a-z, 0-9,
.Ql . ,
.Ql - ,
and
.Ql _ .
.It Dv VERSION_ID
Lower case version of the version with only a-z, 0-9,
.Ql . ,
.Ql - ,
and
.Ql _ .
.It Dv PRETTY_NAME
A pretty version of the name presented to the user.
May contain release information.
.It Dv ANSI_COLOR
Suggested color presentation for the OS.
This string should be suitable for inclusion within an ESC [ m ANSI/ECMA-48
escape sequence to render the OS in its preferred color.
This variable is optional.
.It Dv CPE_NAME
A CPE name for the operating system.
This field shall follow the NIST Common Platform Enumeration specification.
.It Dv HOME_URL
.It Dv SUPPORT_URL
.It Dv BUG_REPORT_URL
.It Dv PRIVACY_POLICY_URL
Links on the internet, in RFC 3986 format for different aspects of this OS.
These variables are optional.
.It Dv BUILD_ID
A string identifying the build.
This variable is optional.
.It Dv VARIANT
A string describing the variant of this operating system.
This variable is optional.
.It Dv VARIANT_ID
Lower case version of the variant with only a-z, 0-9,
.Ql . ,
.Ql - ,
and
.Ql _ .
This variable is optional.
.El
.Pp
All other variables have no standard-defined meaning.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXXXXXX -compact
.It Pa /etc/os-release
Symbolic link to actual
.Pa os-release
file.
.It Pa /var/run/os-release
Generated os-release file describing the currently running system.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Bl -tag -width XXXXXXXXXX -compact
.It CPE Specification
.Lk https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/security-content-automation-protocol/scap-specifications/cpe
.It RFC 3986
.Lk https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986
.It os-release Specification
.Lk https://www.linux.org/docs/man5/os-release.html
.Sh HISTORY
This file first appeared in
.Fx 13.0 .
