.\" Copyright (c) 1995
.\"	Jordan K. Hubbard
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2005
.Dt RC.CONF 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc.conf
.Nd system configuration information
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The file
.Nm
contains descriptive information about the local host name, configuration
details for any potential network interfaces and which services should be
started up at system initial boot time.
In new installations, the
.Nm
file is generally initialized by the system installation utility,
.Xr sysinstall 8 .
.Pp
The purpose of
.Nm
is not to run commands or perform system startup actions
directly.
Instead, it is included by the
various generic startup scripts in
.Pa /etc
which conditionalize their
internal actions according to the settings found there.
.Pp
The
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file is included from the file
.Pa /etc/defaults/rc.conf ,
which specifies the default settings for all the available options.
Options need only be specified in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
when the system administrator wishes to override these defaults.
The file
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
is used to override settings in
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
for historical reasons.
See the
.Va rc_conf_files
variable below.
.Pp
The following list provides a name and short description for each
variable that can be set in the
.Nm
file:
.Bl -tag -width indent-two
.It Va rc_debug
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable output of debug messages from rc scripts.
This variable can be helpful in diagnosing mistakes when
editing or integrating new scripts.
Beware that this produces copious output to the terminal and
.Xr syslog 3 .
.It Va rc_info
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
disable informational messages from the rc scripts.
Informational messages are displayed when
a condition that is not serious enough to warrant a warning or
an error occurs.
.It Va swapfile
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
no swapfile is installed, otherwise the value is used as the full
pathname to a file to use for additional swap space.
.It Va apm_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable support for Automatic Power Management with
the
.Xr apm 8
command.
.It Va apmd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Run
.Xr apmd 8
to handle APM event from userland.
This also enables support for APM.
.It Va apmd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va apmd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr apmd 8
daemon.
.It Va devd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Run
.Xr devd 8
to handle device added, removed or unknown events from the kernel.
.It Va kldxref_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to automatically rebuild
.Pa linker.hints
files with
.Xr kldxref 8
at boot time.
.It Va kldxref_clobber
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
If
.Va kldxref_enable
is true,
setting to
.Dq Li YES
will overwrite existing
.Pa linker.hints
files at boot time.
Otherwise,
only missing
.Pa linker.hints
files are generated.
.It Va kldxref_module_path
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
A semi-colon
.Pq Ql \&;
delimited list of paths containing
.Xr kld 4
modules.
If empty,
the contents of the
.Va kern.module_path
.Xr sysctl 8
are used.
.It Va pccard_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable PCCARD support at boot time.
.It Va pccard_mem
.Pq Vt str
Set to PCCARD controller memory address or
.Dq Li DEFAULT
for the default value.
.It Va pccard_beep
.Pq Vt int
If 0,
set the PCCARD controller to silent mode.
If 1,
set it to beep mode.
If 2,
set it to melody mode.
.It Va pccard_conf
.Pq Vt str
Path to the configuration file for the
.Xr pccardd 8
daemon (e.g.\&
.Pa /etc/pccard.conf.sample ) .
.It Va pccardd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va pccard_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr pccardd 8
daemon.
.It Va powerd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable the system power control facility with the
.Xr powerd 8
daemon.
.It Va powerd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va powerd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr powerd 8
daemon.
.It Va removable_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
List of removable network interfaces to be supported by
.Pa /etc/pccard_ether .
.It Va tmpmfs
Controls the creation of a
.Pa /tmp
memory file system.
Always happens if set to
.Dq Li YES
and never happens if set to
.Dq Li NO .
If set to anything else, a memory file system is created if
.Pa /tmp
is not writable.
.It Va tmpsize
Controls the size of a created
.Pa /tmp
memory file system.
.It Va tmpmfs_flags
Extra options passed to the
.Xr mdmfs 8
utility when the memory file system for
.Pa /tmp
is created.
The default is
.Dq Li -S ,
which inhibits the use of softupdates on
.Pa /tmp
to waste as little space as possible.
See
.Xr mdmfs 8
for other options you can use in
.Va tmpmfs_flags .
.It Va varmfs
Controls the creation of a
.Pa /var
memory file system.
Always happens if set to
.Dq Li YES
and never happens if set to
.Dq Li NO .
If set to anything else, a memory file system is created if
.Pa /var
is not writable.
.It Va varsize
Controls the size of a created
.Pa /var
memory file system.
.It Va varmfs_flags
Extra options passed to the
.Xr mdmfs 8
utility when the memory file system for
.Pa /var
is created.
The default is
.Dq Li -S ,
which inhibits the use of softupdates on
.Pa /var
to waste as little space as possible.
See
.Xr mdmfs 8
for other options you can use in
.Va varmfs_flags .
.It Va populate_var
Controls the automatic population of the
.Pa /var
file system.
Always happens if set to
.Dq Li YES
and never happens if set to
.Dq Li NO .
If set to anything else, a memory file system is created if
.Pa /var
is not writable.
Note that this process requires access to certain commands in
.Pa /usr
before
.Pa /usr
is mounted on normal systems.
.It Va local_startup
.Pq Vt str
List of directories to search for startup script files.
.It Va script_name_sep
.Pq Vt str
The field separator to use for breaking down the list of startup script files
into individual filenames.
The default is a space.
It is not necessary to change this unless there are startup scripts with names
containing spaces.
.It Va hostname
.Pq Vt str
The fully qualified domain name (FQDN) of this host on the network.
This should almost certainly be set to something meaningful, even if
there is no network connection.
If
.Xr dhclient 8
is used to set the hostname via DHCP,
this variable should be set to an empty string.
.It Va ipv6_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Enable support for IPv6 networking.
Note that this requires that the kernel have been compiled with
.Cd "options INET6" .
.It Va nisdomainname
.Pq Vt str
The NIS domain name of this host, or
.Dq Li NO
if NIS is not used.
.It Va dhclient_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to the DHCP client program
.Pa ( /sbin/dhclient ,
the
.Ox
DHCP client,
is the default).
.It Va dhclient_flags
.Pq Vt str
Additional flags to pass to the DHCP client program.
For the
.Ox
DHCP client, see the
.Xr dhclient 8
manpage for a description of the command line options available.
.It Va background_dhclient
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start the dhcp client in background.
This can cause trouble with applications depending on
a working network, but it will provide a faster startup
in many cases.
.It Va firewall_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to load firewall rules at startup.
If the kernel was not built with
.Cd "options IPFIREWALL" ,
the
.Pa ipfw.ko
kernel module will be loaded.
See also
.Va ipfilter_enable .
.It Va ipv6_firewall_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_enable .
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to load IPv6 firewall rules at startup.
If the kernel was not built with
.Cd "options IPV6FIREWALL" ,
the
.Pa ip6fw.ko
kernel module will be loaded.
.It Va firewall_script
.Pq Vt str
This variable specifies the full path to the firewall script to run.
The default is
.Pa /etc/rc.firewall .
.It Va ipv6_firewall_script
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_script .
.It Va firewall_type
.Pq Vt str
Names the firewall type from the selection in
.Pa /etc/rc.firewall ,
or the file which contains the local firewall ruleset.
Valid selections from
.Pa /etc/rc.firewall
are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Li simple" -compact
.It Li open
unrestricted IP access
.It Li closed
all IP services disabled, except via
.Dq Li lo0
.It Li client
basic protection for a workstation
.It Li simple
basic protection for a LAN.
.El
.Pp
If a filename is specified, the full path
must be given.
.It Va ipv6_firewall_type
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_type .
.It Va firewall_quiet
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to disable the display of firewall rules on the console during boot.
.It Va ipv6_firewall_quiet
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_quiet .
.It Va firewall_logging
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable firewall event logging.
This is equivalent to the
.Dv IPFIREWALL_VERBOSE
kernel option.
.It Va ipv6_firewall_logging
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_logging .
.It Va firewall_flags
.Pq Vt str
Flags passed to
.Xr ipfw 8
if
.Va firewall_type
specifies a filename.
.It Va ipv6_firewall_flags
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va firewall_flags .
.It Va natd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr natd 8 .
.It Va natd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable
.Xr natd 8 .
.Va firewall_enable
must also be set to
.Dq Li YES ,
and
.Xr divert 4
sockets must be enabled in the kernel.
If the kernel was not built with
.Cd "options IPDIVERT" ,
the
.Pa ipdivert.ko
kernel module will be loaded.
.It Va natd_interface
.Pq Vt str
This is the name of the public interface on which
.Xr natd 8
should run.
The interface may be given as an interface name or as an IP address.
.It Va natd_flags
.Pq Vt str
Additional
.Xr natd 8
flags should be placed here.
The
.Fl n
or
.Fl a
flag is automatically added with the above
.Va natd_interface
as an argument.
.\" ----- ipfilter_enable setting --------------------------------
.It Va ipfilter_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li YES
enables
.Xr ipf 8
packet filtering.
.Pp
Typical usage will require putting
.Bd -literal
ipfilter_enable="YES"
ipnat_enable="YES"
ipmon_enable="YES"
ipfs_enable="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
into
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
and editing
.Pa /etc/ipf.rules
and
.Pa /etc/ipnat.rules
appropriately.
.Pp
Note that
.Va ipfilter_enable
and
.Va ipnat_enable
can be enabled independently.
.Va ipmon_enable
and
.Va ipfs_enable
both require at least one of
.Va ipfilter_enable
and
.Va ipnat_enable
to be enabled.
.Pp
Having
.Bd -literal
options IPFILTER
options IPFILTER_LOG
options IPFILTER_DEFAULT_BLOCK
.Ed
.Pp
in the kernel configuration file is a good idea, too.
.\" ----- ipfilter_program setting ------------------------------
.It Va ipfilter_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr ipf 8
(default
.Pa /sbin/ipf ) .
.\" ----- ipfilter_rules setting --------------------------------
.It Va ipfilter_rules
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Pa /etc/ipf.rules
by default.
This variable contains the name of the filter rule definition file.
The file is expected to be readable for the
.Xr ipf 8
command to execute.
.\" ----- ipv6_ipfilter_rules setting ---------------------------
.It Va ipv6_ipfilter_rules
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Pa /etc/ipf6.rules
by default.
This variable contains the IPv6 filter rule definition file.
The file is expected to be readable for the
.Xr ipf 8
command to execute.
.\" ----- ipfilter_flags setting --------------------------------
.It Va ipfilter_flags
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
This variable contains flags passed to the
.Xr ipf 8
program.
.\" ----- ipnat_enable setting ----------------------------------
.It Va ipnat_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set it to
.Dq Li YES
to enable
.Xr ipnat 1
network address translation.
See
.Va ipfilter_enable
for a detailed discussion.
.\" ----- ipnat_program setting ---------------------------------
.It Va ipnat_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr ipnat 1
(default
.Pa /sbin/ipnat ) .
.\" ----- ipnat_rules setting -----------------------------------
.It Va ipnat_rules
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Pa /etc/ipnat.rules
by default.
This variable contains the name of the file
holding the network address translation definition.
This file is expected to be readable for the
.Xr ipnat 1
command to execute.
.\" ----- ipnat_flags setting -----------------------------------
.It Va ipnat_flags
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
This variable contains flags passed to the
.Xr ipnat 1
program.
.\" ----- ipmon_enable setting ----------------------------------
.It Va ipmon_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set it to
.Dq Li YES
to enable
.Xr ipmon 8
monitoring (logging
.Xr ipf 8
and
.Xr ipnat 1
events).
Setting this variable needs setting
.Va ipfilter_enable
or
.Va ipnat_enable
too.
See
.Va ipfilter_enable
for a detailed discussion.
.\" ----- ipmon_program setting ---------------------------------
.It Va ipmon_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr ipmon 8
(default
.Pa /sbin/ipmon ) .
.\" ----- ipmon_flags setting -----------------------------------
.It Va ipmon_flags
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li -Ds
by default.
This variable contains flags passed to the
.Xr ipmon 8
program.
Another typical example would be
.Dq Fl D Pa /var/log/ipflog
to have
.Xr ipmon 8
log directly to a file bypassing
.Xr syslogd 8 .
Make sure to adjust
.Pa /etc/newsyslog.conf
in such case like this:
.Bd -literal
/var/log/ipflog  640  10  100  *  Z  /var/run/ipmon.pid
.Ed
.\" ----- ipfs_enable setting -----------------------------------
.It Va ipfs_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set it to
.Dq Li YES
to enable
.Xr ipfs 8
saving the filter and NAT state tables during shutdown
and reloading them during startup again.
Setting this variable needs setting
.Va ipfilter_enable
or
.Va ipnat_enable
to
.Dq Li YES
too.
See
.Va ipfilter_enable
for a detailed discussion.
Note that if
.Va kern_securelevel
is set to 3,
.Va ipfs_enable
cannot be used
because the raised securelevel will prevent
.Xr ipfs 8
from saving the state tables at shutdown time.
.\" ----- ipfs_program setting ----------------------------------
.It Va ipfs_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr ipfs 8
(default
.Pa /sbin/ipfs ) .
.\" ----- ipfs_flags setting ------------------------------------
.It Va ipfs_flags
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
This variable contains flags passed to the
.Xr ipfs 8
program.
.\" ----- end of added ipf hook ---------------------------------
.It Va pf_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li YES
enables
.Xr pf 4
packet filtering.
.Pp
Typical usage will require putting
.Pp
.Dl pf_enable="YES"
.Pp
into
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
and editing
.Pa /etc/pf.conf
appropriately.
.Pp
.Dl "device pf"
.Pp
builds
.Xr pf 4
into the kernel.
Otherwise it is loaded from a module.
.It Va pf_rules
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr pf 4
ruleset configuration file
(default
.Pa /etc/pf.conf ) .
.It Va pf_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr pfctl 8
(default
.Pa /sbin/pfctl ) .
.It Va pf_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va pf_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these flags are passed to the
.Xr pfctl 8
program when loading the ruleset.
.It Va pflog_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li YES
enables
.Xr pflogd 8
which logs packets from the
.Xr pf 4
packet filter.
.It Va pflog_logfile
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va pflog_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
this controls where
.Xr pflogd 8
stores the logfile
(default
.Pa /var/log/pflog ) .
Check
.Pa /etc/newsyslog.conf
to adjust logfile rotation for this.
.It Va pflog_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr pflogd 8
(default
.Pa /sbin/pflogd ) .
.It Va pflog_flags
.Pq Vt str
Empty by default.
This variable contains additional flags passed to the
.Xr pflogd 8
program.
.It Va tcp_extensions
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
by default.
Setting this to
.Dq Li NO
disables certain TCP options as described by
.Rs
.%T "RFC 1323"
.Re
Setting this to
.Dq Li NO
might help remedy such problems with connections as randomly hanging
or other weird behavior.
Some network devices are known
to be broken with respect to these options.
.It Va log_in_vain
.Pq Vt int
Set to 0 by default.
The
.Xr sysctl 8
variables,
.Va net.inet.tcp.log_in_vain
and
.Va net.inet.udp.log_in_vain ,
as described in
.Xr tcp 4
and
.Xr udp 4 ,
are set to the given value.
.It Va tcp_keepalive
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li NO
will disable probing idle TCP connections to verify that the
peer is still up and reachable.
.It Va tcp_drop_synfin
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li YES
will cause the kernel to ignore TCP frames that have both
the SYN and FIN flags set.
This prevents OS fingerprinting, but may
break some legitimate applications.
This option is only available if the
kernel was built with the
.Dv TCP_DROP_SYNFIN
option.
.It Va icmp_drop_redirect
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li YES
will cause the kernel to ignore ICMP REDIRECT packets.
Refer to
.Xr icmp 4
for more information.
.It Va icmp_log_redirect
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Setting to
.Dq Li YES
will cause the kernel to log ICMP REDIRECT packets.
Note that
the log messages are not rate-limited, so this option should only be used
for troubleshooting networks.
Refer to
.Xr icmp 4
for more information.
.It Va icmp_bmcastecho
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to respond to broadcast or multicast ICMP ping packets.
Refer to
.Xr icmp 4
for more information.
.It Va ip_portrange_first
.Pq Vt int
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the first port in the default portrange.
Refer to
.Xr ip 4
for more information.
.It Va ip_portrange_last
.Pq Vt int
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the last port in the default portrange.
Refer to
.Xr ip 4
for more information.
.It Va network_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of network interfaces to configure on this host or 
.Dq Li "AUTO"
(the default) for all current interfaces.
For example, if the only network devices in the system are the loopback
device
.Pq Li lo0
and a NIC using the
.Xr ed 4
driver,
this could be set to
.Dq Li "lo0 ed0" .
An
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable is also assumed to exist for each value of
.Ar interface .
It is also possible to add IP alias entries here in cases where
multiple IP addresses registered against a single interface
are desired.
Assuming that the interface in question was
.Li ed0 ,
it might look
something like this:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0_alias0="inet 127.0.0.253 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias1="inet 127.0.0.254 netmask 0xffffffff"
.Ed
.Pp
And so on.
For each
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _alias Ns Aq Ar n
entry that is found,
its contents are passed to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
Execution stops at the first unsuccessful access, so if
something like this is present:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0_alias0="inet 127.0.0.251 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias1="inet 127.0.0.252 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias2="inet 127.0.0.253 netmask 0xffffffff"
ifconfig_ed0_alias4="inet 127.0.0.254 netmask 0xffffffff"
.Ed
.Pp
Then note that alias4 would
.Em not
be added since the search would
stop with the missing alias3 entry.
.Pp
If the
.Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface
file is present, it is read and executed by the
.Xr sh 1
interpreter
before configuring the interface as specified in the
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
and
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _alias Ns Aq Ar n
variables.
.Pp
It is possible to bring up an interface with DHCP by adding
.Dq Li DHCP
to the
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable.
For instance, to initialize the
.Li ed0
device via DHCP,
it is possible to use something like:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0="DHCP"
.Ed
.Pp
Also, if your interface needs WPA authentication, it is possible to add
.Dq Li WPA
to the
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable.
.Pp
Finally, you can add
.Xr ifconfig 8
options in this variable, in addition to the
.Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface
file.
For instance, to initialize the
.Li wi0
device via DHCP, using WPA authentication and 802.11b mode, it is
possible to use something like:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_wi0="DHCP WPA mode 11b"
.Ed
.Pp
In addition to the
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
form, a fallback variable
.Va ifconfig_DEFAULT
may be configured.
It will be used for all interfaces no
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable.
This is intended to replace the no longer supported
.Va pccard_ifconfig
variable.
.Pp
It is also possible to rename interface by doing:
.Bd -literal
ifconfig_ed0_name="net0"
ifconfig_net0="inet 10.0.0.1 netmask 0xffff0000"
.Ed
.It Va ipv6_network_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
This is the IPv6 equivalent of
.Va network_interfaces .
Instead of setting the ifconfig variables as
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
they should be set as
.Va ipv6_ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface .
Aliases should be set as
.Va ipv6_ifconfig_ Ns Ao Ar interface Ac Ns Va _alias Ns Aq Ar n .
.Va ipv6_prefix_ Ns Aq Ar interface
does something.
Interfaces that do not have a
.Va ipv6_ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
setting will be auto configured by
.Xr rtsol 8
if the
.Va ipv6_gateway_enable
is set to
.Dq Li NO .
Note that the IPv6 networking code does not support the
.Pa /etc/start_if. Ns Aq Ar interface
files.
.It Va ipv6_default_interface
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the default output interface for scoped addresses.
Now this works only for IPv6 link local multicast addresses.
.It Va cloned_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of clonable network interfaces to create on this host.
Entries in
.Va cloned_interfaces
are automatically appended to
.Va network_interfaces
for configuration.
.It Va gif_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of
.Xr gif 4
tunnel interfaces to configure on this host.
A
.Va gifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable is assumed to exist for each value of
.Ar interface .
The value of this variable is used to configure the link layer of the
tunnel according to the syntax of the
.Cm tunnel
option to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
Additionally, this option ensures that each listed interface is created
via the
.Cm create
option to
.Xr ifconfig 8
before attempting to configure it.
.It Va sppp_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of
.Xr sppp 4
interfaces to configure on this host.
A
.Va spppconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
variable is assumed to exist for each value of
.Ar interface .
Each interface should also be configured by a general
.Va ifconfig_ Ns Aq Ar interface
setting.
Refer to
.Xr spppcontrol 8
for more information about available options.
.It Va ppp_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ppp 8
daemon.
.It Va ppp_mode
.Pq Vt str
Mode in which to run the
.Xr ppp 8
daemon.
Accepted modes are
.Dq Li auto ,
.Dq Li ddial ,
.Dq Li direct
and
.Dq Li dedicated .
See the manual for a full description.
.It Va ppp_nat
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enables network address translation.
Used in conjunction with
.Va gateway_enable
allows hosts on private network addresses access to the Internet using
this host as a network address translating router.
.It Va ppp_profile
.Pq Vt str
The name of the profile to use from
.Pa /etc/ppp/ppp.conf .
.It Va ppp_user
.Pq Vt str
The name of the user under which
.Xr ppp 8
should be started.
By
default,
.Xr ppp 8
is started as
.Dq Li root .
.It Va rc_conf_files
.Pq Vt str
This option is used to specify a list of files that will override
the settings in
.Pa /etc/defaults/rc.conf .
The files will be read in the order in which they are specified and should
include the full path to the file.
By default, the files specified are
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
and
.Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
.It Va gbde_autoattach_all
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Pa /etc/rc.d/gbde
will attempt to automatically initialize your .bde devices in
.Pa /etc/fstab .
.It Va gbde_devices
.Pq Vt str
List the devices that the script should try to attach,
or
.Dq Li AUTO .
.It Va gbde_lockdir
.Pq Vt str
The directory where the
.Xr gbde 4
lockfiles are located.
The default lockfile directory is
.Pa /etc .
.Pp
The lockfile for each individual
.Xr gbde 4
device can be overridden by setting the variable
.Va gbde_lock_ Ns Aq Ar device ,
where
.Ar device
is the encrypted device without the
.Dq Pa /dev/
and
.Dq Pa .bde
parts.
.It Va gbde_attach_attempts
.Pq Vt int
Number of times to attempt attaching to a
.Xr gbde 4
device, i.e., how many times the user is asked for the pass-phrase.
Default is 3.
.It Va geli_devices
.Pq Vt str
List of devices to automatically attach on boot.
Note that .eli devices from
.Pa /etc/fstab
are automatically appended to this list.
.It Va geli_tries
.Pq Vt int
Number of times user is asked for the pass-phrase.
If empty, it will be taken from
.Va kern.geom.eli.tries
sysctl variable.
.It Va geli_default_flags
.Pq Vt str
Default flags to use by
.Xr geli 8
when configuring disk encryption.
Flags can be configured for every device separately by defining
.Va geli_<device>_flags
variable.
.It Va geli_autodetach
.Pq Vt str
Specifies if GELI devices should be marked for detach on last close after
file systems are mounted.
Default is
.Dq Li YES .
This can be changed for every device separately by defining
.Va geli_<device>_autodetach
variable.
.It Va geli_swap_flags
Options passed to the
.Xr geli 8
utility when encrypted GEOM providers for swap partitions are created.
The default is
.Dq Li -a aes -l 256 -s 4096 -d .
.It Va root_rw_mount
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
by default.
After the file systems are checked at boot time, the root file system
is remounted as read-write if this is set to
.Dq Li YES .
Diskless systems that mount their root file system from a read-only remote
NFS share should set this to
.Dq Li NO
in their
.Pa rc.conf .
.It Va fsck_y_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Xr fsck 8
will be run with the
.Fl y
flag if the initial preen
of the file systems fails.
.It Va background_fsck
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the system will attempt to run
.Xr fsck 8
in the background where possible.
.It Va background_fsck_delay
.Pq Vt int
The amount of time in seconds to sleep before starting a background
.Xr fsck 8 .
It defaults to sixty seconds to allow large applications such as
the X server to start before disk I/O bandwidth is monopolized by
.Xr fsck 8 .
.It Va netfs_types
.Pq Vt str
List of file system types that are network-based.
This list should generally not be modified by end users.
Use
.Va extra_netfs_types
instead.
.It Va extra_netfs_types
.Pq Vt str
If set to something other than
.Dq Li NO
(the default),
this variable extends the list of file system types
for which automatic mounting at startup by
.Xr rc 8
should be delayed until the network is initialized.
It should contain
a whitespace-separated list of network file system descriptor pairs,
each consisting of a file system type as passed to
.Xr mount 8
and a human-readable, one-word description,
joined with a colon
.Pq Ql \&: .
Extending the default list in this way is only necessary
when third party file system types are used.
.It Va syslogd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr syslogd 8
daemon.
.It Va syslogd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr syslogd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/syslogd ) .
.It Va syslogd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va syslogd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr syslogd 8 .
.It Va inetd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr inetd 8
daemon.
.It Va inetd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr inetd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/inetd ) .
.It Va inetd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va inetd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr inetd 8 .
.It Va named_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr named 8
daemon.
.It Va named_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr named 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/named ) .
.It Va named_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va named_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr named 8 .
.It Va named_pidfile
.Pq Vt str
This is the default path to the
.Xr named 8
daemon's PID file.
Change it if you change the location in
.Xr named.conf 5 .
.It Va named_chrootdir
.Pq Vt str
The root directory for a name server run in a
.Xr chroot 8
environment (default
.Pa /var/named ) .
If left empty
.Xr named 8
will not be run in a
.Xr chroot 8
environment.
.It Va named_chroot_autoupdate
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to disable automatic update of the
.Xr chroot 8
environment.
.It Va named_symlink_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to disable symlinking of
daemon's PID file
into the
.Xr chroot 8
environment.
.It Va kerberos5_server_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start a Kerberos 5 authentication server
at boot time.
.It Va kerberos5_server
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va kerberos5_server_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
this is the path to Kerberos 5 Authentication Server.
.It Va kadmind5_server_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start
.Xr kadmind 8 ,
the Kerberos 5 Administration Daemon; set to
.Dq Li NO
on a slave server.
.It Va kadmind5_server
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va kadmind5_server_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
this is the path to Kerberos 5 Administration Daemon.
.It Va kpasswdd_server_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start
.Xr kpasswdd 8 ,
the Kerberos 5 Password-Changing Daemon; set to
.Dq Li NO
on a slave server.
.It Va kpasswdd_server
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va kpasswdd_server_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
this is the path to Kerberos 5 Password-Changing Daemon.
.It Va rwhod_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rwhod 8
daemon at boot time.
.It Va rwhod_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rwhod_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to it.
.It Va amd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr amd 8
daemon at boot time.
.It Va amd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va amd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to it.
See the
.Xr amd 8
manpage for more information.
.It Va amd_map_program
.Pq Vt str
If set,
the specified program is run to get the list of
.Xr amd 8
maps.
For example, if the
.Xr amd 8
maps are stored in NIS, one can set this to
run
.Xr ypcat 1
to get a list of
.Xr amd 8
maps from the
.Pa amd.master
NIS map.
.It Va update_motd
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Pa /etc/motd
will be updated at boot time to reflect the kernel release
being run.
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
.Pa /etc/motd
will not be updated.
.It Va nfs_client_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the NFS client daemons at boot time.
.It Va nfs_access_cache
.Pq Vt int
If
.Va nfs_client_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this can be set to
.Dq Li 0
to disable NFS ACCESS RPC caching, or to the number of seconds for which
NFS ACCESS
results should be cached.
A value of 2-10 seconds will substantially reduce network
traffic for many NFS operations.
.It Va nfs_server_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the NFS server daemons at boot time.
.It Va nfs_server_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nfs_server_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr nfsd 8
daemon.
.It Va mountd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
and no
.Va nfs_server_enable
is set, start
.Xr mountd 8 ,
but not
.Xr nfsd 8
daemon.
It is commonly needed to run CFS without real NFS used.
.It Va mountd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va mountd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr mountd 8
daemon.
.It Va weak_mountd_authentication
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
allow services like PCNFSD to make non-privileged mount
requests.
.It Va nfs_reserved_port_only
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
provide NFS services only on a secure port.
.It Va nfs_bufpackets
.Pq Vt int
If set to a number, indicates the number of packets worth of
socket buffer space to reserve on an NFS client.
The kernel default is typically 4.
Using a higher number may be
useful on gigabit networks to improve performance.
The minimum value is
2 and the maximum is 64.
.It Va rpc_lockd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
and also an NFS server, run
.Xr rpc.lockd 8
at boot time.
.It Va rpc_statd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
and also an NFS server, run
.Xr rpc.statd 8
at boot time.
.It Va rpcbind_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr rpcbind 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/rpcbind ) .
.It Va rpcbind_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rpcbind 8
service at boot time.
.It Va rpcbind_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rpcbind_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rpcbind 8
daemon.
.It Va keyserv_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr keyserv 8
daemon on boot for running Secure RPC.
.It Va keyserv_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va keyserv_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr keyserv 8
daemon.
.It Va pppoed_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr pppoed 8
daemon at boot time to provide PPP over Ethernet services.
.It Va pppoed_ Ns Ar provider
.Pq Vt str
.Xr pppoed 8
listens to requests to this
.Ar provider
and ultimately runs
.Xr ppp 8
with a
.Ar system
argument of the same name.
.It Va pppoed_flags
.Pq Vt str
Additional flags to pass to
.Xr pppoed 8 .
.It Va pppoed_interface
.Pq Vt str
The network interface to run
.Xr pppoed 8
on.
This is mandatory when
.Va pppoed_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
.It Va timed_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr timed 8
service at boot time.
This command is intended for networks of
machines where a consistent
.Dq "network time"
for all hosts must be established.
This is often useful in large NFS
environments where time stamps on files are expected to be consistent
network-wide.
.It Va timed_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va timed_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr timed 8
service.
.It Va ntpdate_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run
.Xr ntpdate 8
at system startup.
This command is intended to
synchronize the system clock only
.Em once
from some standard reference.
An option to set this up initially
(from a list of known servers) is also provided by the
.Xr sysinstall 8
program when the system is first installed.
.It Va ntpdate_hosts
.Pq Vt str
A whitespace-separated list of NTP servers to synchronize with at startup.
The default is to use the servers listed in
.Pa /etc/ntp.conf ,
if that file exists.
.It Va ntpdate_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr ntpdate 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/ntpdate ) .
.It Va ntpdate_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va ntpdate_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ntpdate 8
command (typically a hostname).
.It Va ntpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ntpd 8
command at boot time.
.It Va ntpd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr ntpd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/ntpd ) .
.It Va ntpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va ntpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ntpd 8
daemon.
.It Va ntpd_sync_on_start
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
.Xr ntpd 8
is run with the
.Fl g
flag, which syncs the system's clock on startup.
See
.Xr ntpd 8
for more information regarding the
.Fl g
option.
This is a preferred alternative to using
.Xr ntpdate 8
or specifying the
.Va ntpdate_enable
variable.
.It Va nis_client_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ypbind 8
service at system boot time.
.It Va nis_client_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_client_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ypbind 8
service.
.It Va nis_ypset_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ypset 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_ypset_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_ypset_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ypset 8
daemon.
.It Va nis_server_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr ypserv 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_server_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_server_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr ypserv 8
daemon.
.It Va nis_ypxfrd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rpc.ypxfrd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_ypxfrd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_ypxfrd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rpc.ypxfrd 8
daemon.
.It Va nis_yppasswdd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rpc.yppasswdd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va nis_yppasswdd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va nis_yppasswdd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rpc.yppasswdd 8
daemon.
.It Va rpc_ypupdated_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Nm rpc.ypupdated
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va bsnmpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr bsnmpd 1
daemon at system boot time.
Be sure to understand the security implications of running SNMP daemon
on your host.
.It Va bsnmpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va bsnmpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr bsnmpd 1
daemon.
.It Va defaultrouter
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
create a default route to this host name or IP address
(use an IP address if this router is also required to get to the
name server!).
.It Va ipv6_defaultrouter
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va defaultrouter .
.It Va static_routes
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of static routes that are to be added at system
boot time.
If not set to
.Dq Li NO
then for each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, a
.Va route_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist
whose contents will later be passed to a
.Dq Nm route Cm add
operation.
For example:
.Bd -literal
static_routes="mcast gif0local"
route_mcast="-net 224.0.0.0/4 -iface gif0"
route_gif0local="-host 169.254.1.1 -iface lo0"
.Ed
.It Va ipv6_static_routes
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va static_routes .
If not set to
.Dq Li NO
then for each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, a
.Va ipv6_route_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist
whose contents will later be passed to a
.Dq Nm route Cm add Fl inet6
operation.
.It Va natm_static_routes
.Pq Vt str
The
.Xr natmip 4
equivalent of
.Va static_routes .
If not empty then for each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, a
.Va route_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist whose contents will later be passed to a
.Dq Nm atmconfig Cm natm Cm add
operation.
.It Va gateway_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
configure host to act as an IP router, e.g.\& to forward packets
between interfaces.
.It Va ipv6_gateway_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va gateway_enable .
.It Va router_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run a routing daemon of some sort, based on the
settings of
.Va router
and
.Va router_flags .
.It Va ipv6_router_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va router_enable .
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run a routing daemon of some sort, based on the
settings of
.Va ipv6_router
and
.Va ipv6_router_flags .
.It Va router
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va router_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the name of the routing daemon to use.
.It Va ipv6_router
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va router .
.It Va router_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va router_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the routing daemon.
.It Va ipv6_router_flags
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va router_flags .
.It Va mrouted_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the multicast routing daemon,
.Xr mrouted 8 .
.It Va mroute6d_enable
.Pq Vt bool
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va mrouted_enable .
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the IPv6 multicast routing daemon.
Note that no IPv6 multicast routing daemon is included in the
.Fx
base system but
.Xr pim6dd 8
can be installed from the
.Fx
Ports Collection.
.It Va mrouted_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va mrouted_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr mrouted 8
daemon.
.It Va mroute6d_flags
.Pq Vt str
The IPv6 equivalent of
.Va mrouted_flags .
If
.Va mroute6d_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags passed to the IPv6 multicast routing daemon.
.It Va mroute6d_program
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va mroute6d_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the path to the IPv6 multicast routing daemon.
.It Va rtadvd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rtadvd 8
daemon at boot time.
.Xr rtadvd 8
will only run if
.Va ipv6_gateway_enable
is also set to
.Dq Li YES .
The
.Xr rtadvd 8
utility sends router advertisement packets to the interfaces specified in
.Va rtadvd_interfaces
and should only be enabled with great care.
You may want to fine-tune
.Xr rtadvd.conf 5 .
.It Va rtadvd_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rtadvd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES
this is the list of interfaces to use.
.It Va ipxgateway_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable the routing of IPX traffic.
.It Va ipxrouted_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr IPXrouted 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va ipxrouted_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va ipxrouted_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr IPXrouted 8
daemon.
.It Va arpproxy_all
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable global proxy ARP.
.It Va forward_sourceroute
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
and
.Va gateway_enable
is also set to
.Dq Li YES ,
source-routed packets are forwarded.
.It Va accept_sourceroute
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the system will accept source-routed packets directed at it.
.It Va rarpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr rarpd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va rarpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va rarpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr rarpd 8
daemon.
.It Va bootparamd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr bootparamd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va bootparamd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va bootparamd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr bootparamd 8
daemon.
.It Va stf_interface_ipv4addr
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the local IPv4 address for 6to4 (IPv6 over IPv4 tunneling
interface).
Specify this entry to enable the 6to4 interface.
.It Va stf_interface_ipv4plen
.Pq Vt int
Prefix length for 6to4 IPv4 addresses, to limit peer address range.
An effective value is 0-31.
.It Va stf_interface_ipv6_ifid
.Pq Vt str
IPv6 interface ID for
.Xr stf 4 .
This can be set to
.Dq Li AUTO .
.It Va stf_interface_ipv6_slaid
.Pq Vt str
IPv6 Site Level Aggregator for
.Xr stf 4 .
.It Va ipv6_faith_prefix
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the faith prefix to enable a FAITH IPv6-to-IPv4 TCP
translator.
You also need
.Xr faithd 8
setup.
.It Va ipv6_ipv4mapping
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES
this enables IPv4 mapped IPv6 address communication (like
.Li ::ffff:a.b.c.d ) .
.It Va atm_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable the configuration of ATM interfaces at system boot time.
For all of the ATM variables described below, please refer to the
.Xr atm 8
manual page for further details on the available command parameters.
Also refer to the files in
.Pa /usr/share/examples/atm
for more detailed configuration information.
.It Va atm_load
.Pq Vt str
This is a list of physical ATM interface drivers to load.
Typical values are
.Dq Li hfa_pci
and/or
.Dq Li hea_pci .
.It Va atm_netif_ Ns Aq Ar intf
.Pq Vt str
For the ATM physical interface
.Ar intf ,
this variable defines the name prefix and count for the ATM network
interfaces to be created.
The value will be passed as the parameters of an
.Dq Nm atm Cm "set netif" Ar intf
command.
.It Va atm_sigmgr_ Ns Aq Ar intf
.Pq Vt str
For the ATM physical interface
.Ar intf ,
this variable defines the ATM signalling manager to be used.
The value will be passed as the parameters of an
.Dq Nm atm Cm attach Ar intf
command.
.It Va atm_prefix_ Ns Aq Ar intf
.Pq Vt str
For the ATM physical interface
.Ar intf ,
this variable defines the NSAP prefix for interfaces using a UNI signalling
manager.
If set to
.Dq Li ILMI ,
the prefix will automatically be set via the
.Xr ilmid 8
daemon.
Otherwise, the value will be passed as the parameters of an
.Dq Nm atm Cm "set prefix" Ar intf
command.
.It Va atm_macaddr_ Ns Aq Ar intf
.Pq Vt str
For the ATM physical interface
.Ar intf ,
this variable defines the MAC address for interfaces using a UNI signalling
manager.
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the hardware MAC address contained in the ATM interface card will be used.
Otherwise, the value will be passed as the parameters of an
.Dq Nm atm Cm "set mac" Ar intf
command.
.It Va atm_arpserver_ Ns Aq Ar netif
.Pq Vt str
For the ATM network interface
.Ar netif ,
this variable defines the ATM address for a host which is to provide ATMARP
service.
This variable is only applicable to interfaces using a UNI signalling
manager.
If set to
.Dq Li local ,
this host will become an ATMARP server.
The value will be passed as the parameters of an
.Dq Nm atm Cm "set arpserver" Ar netif
command.
.It Va atm_scsparp_ Ns Aq Ar netif
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
SCSP/ATMARP service for the network interface
.Ar netif
will be initiated using the
.Xr scspd 8
and
.Xr atmarpd 8
daemons.
This variable is only applicable if
.Va atm_arpserver_ Ns Aq Ar netif
is set to
.Dq Li local .
.It Va atm_pvcs
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of ATM PVCs to be added at system
boot time.
For each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, an
.Va atm_pvc_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist.
The value of each of these variables
will be passed as the parameters of an
.Dq Nm atm Cm "add pvc"
command.
.It Va atm_arps
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of permanent ATM ARP entries to be added
at system boot time.
For each whitespace separated
.Ar element
in the value, an
.Va atm_arp_ Ns Aq Ar element
variable is assumed to exist.
The value of each of these variables
will be passed as the parameters of an
.Dq Nm atm Cm "add arp"
command.
.It Va natm_interfaces
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of
.Xr natm 4
interfaces that will also be used for HARP through
.Xr harp 4 .
If this list is not empty all interfaces in the list will be brought up
with
.Xr ifconfig 8
and
.Xr harp 4
will be loaded.
For this to work the interface drivers must be either compiled into the
kernel or must reside on the root partition.
.It Va keybell
.Pq Vt str
The keyboard bell sound.
Set to
.Dq Li normal ,
.Dq Li visual ,
.Dq Li off ,
or
.Dq Li NO
if the default behavior is desired.
For details, refer to the
.Xr kbdcontrol 1
manpage.
.It Va keyboard
.Pq Vt str
If set to a non-null string, the virtual console's keyboard input is
set to this device.
.It Va keymap
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
no keymap is installed, otherwise the value is used to install
the keymap file in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/keymaps/ Ns Ao Ar value Ac Ns Pa .kbd .
.It Va keyrate
.Pq Vt str
The keyboard repeat speed.
Set to
.Dq Li slow ,
.Dq Li normal ,
.Dq Li fast ,
or
.Dq Li NO
if the default behavior is desired.
.It Va keychange
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
attempt to program the function keys with the value.
The value should
be a single string of the form:
.Dq Ar funkey_number new_value Op Ar funkey_number new_value ... .
.It Va cursor
.Pq Vt str
Can be set to the value of
.Dq Li normal ,
.Dq Li blink ,
.Dq Li destructive ,
or
.Dq Li NO
to set the cursor behavior explicitly or choose the default behavior.
.It Va scrnmap
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
no screen map is installed, otherwise the value is used to install
the screen map file in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/scrnmaps/ Ns Aq Ar value .
.It Va font8x16
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default 8x16 font value is used for screen size requests, otherwise
the value in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/fonts/ Ns Aq Ar value
is used.
.It Va font8x14
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default 8x14 font value is used for screen size requests, otherwise
the value in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/fonts/ Ns Aq Ar value
is used.
.It Va font8x8
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default 8x8 font value is used for screen size requests, otherwise
the value in
.Pa /usr/share/syscons/fonts/ Ns Aq Ar value
is used.
.It Va blanktime
.Pq Vt int
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default screen blanking interval is used, otherwise it is set
to
.Ar value
seconds.
.It Va saver
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO ,
this is the actual screen saver to use
.Li ( blank , snake , daemon ,
etc).
.It Va moused_nondefault_enable
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the mouse device specified on
the command line is not automatically treated as enabled by the
.Pa /etc/rc.d/moused
script.
Having this variable set to
.Dq Li YES
allows a
.Xr usb 4
mouse,
for example,
to be enabled as soon as it is plugged in.
.It Va moused_enable
.Pq Vt str
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
the
.Xr moused 8
daemon is started for doing cut/paste selection on the console.
.It Va moused_type
.Pq Vt str
This is the protocol type of the mouse connected to this host.
This variable must be set if
.Va moused_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
The
.Xr moused 8
daemon
is able to detect the appropriate mouse type automatically in many cases.
Set this variable to
.Dq Li auto
to let the daemon detect it, or
select one from the following list if the automatic detection fails.
.Pp
If the mouse is attached to the PS/2 mouse port, choose
.Dq Li auto
or
.Dq Li ps/2 ,
regardless of the brand and model of the mouse.
Likewise, if the
mouse is attached to the bus mouse port, choose
.Dq Li auto
or
.Dq Li busmouse .
All other protocols are for serial mice and will not work with
the PS/2 and bus mice.
If this is a USB mouse,
.Dq Li auto
is the only protocol type which will work.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Li x10mouseremote" -compact
.It Li microsoft
Microsoft mouse (serial)
.It Li intellimouse
Microsoft IntelliMouse (serial)
.It Li mousesystems
Mouse systems Corp.\& mouse (serial)
.It Li mmseries
MM Series mouse (serial)
.It Li logitech
Logitech mouse (serial)
.It Li busmouse
A bus mouse
.It Li mouseman
Logitech MouseMan and TrackMan (serial)
.It Li glidepoint
ALPS GlidePoint (serial)
.It Li thinkingmouse
Kensington ThinkingMouse (serial)
.It Li ps/2
PS/2 mouse
.It Li mmhittab
MM HitTablet (serial)
.It Li x10mouseremote
X10 MouseRemote (serial)
.It Li versapad
Interlink VersaPad (serial)
.El
.Pp
Even if the mouse is not in the above list, it may be compatible
with one in the list.
Refer to the manual page for
.Xr moused 8
for compatibility information.
.Pp
It should also be noted that while this is enabled, any
other client of the mouse (such as an X server) should access
the mouse through the virtual mouse device,
.Pa /dev/sysmouse ,
and configure it as a
.Dq Li sysmouse
type mouse, since all
mouse data is converted to this single canonical format when
using
.Xr moused 8 .
If the client program does not support the
.Dq Li sysmouse
type,
specify the
.Dq Li mousesystems
type.
It is the second preferred type.
.It Va moused_port
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va moused_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this is the actual port the mouse is on.
It might be
.Pa /dev/cuad0
for a COM1 serial mouse,
.Pa /dev/psm0
for a PS/2 mouse or
.Pa /dev/mse0
for a bus mouse, for example.
.It Va moused_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va moused_type
is set, these are the additional flags to pass to the
.Xr moused 8
daemon.
.It Va mousechar_start
.Pq Vt int
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
the default mouse cursor character range
.Li 0xd0 Ns - Ns Li 0xd3
is used,
otherwise the range start is set
to
.Ar value
character, see
.Xr vidcontrol 1 .
Use if the default range is occupied in the language code table.
.It Va allscreens_flags
.Pq Vt str
If set,
.Xr vidcontrol 1
is run with these options for each of the virtual terminals
.Pq Pa /dev/ttyv* .
For example,
.Dq Fl m Cm on
will enable the mouse pointer on all virtual terminals
if
.Va moused_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES .
.It Va allscreens_kbdflags
.Pq Vt str
If set,
.Xr kbdcontrol 1
is run with these options for each of the virtual terminals
.Pq Pa /dev/ttyv* .
For example,
.Dq Fl h Li 200
will set the
.Xr syscons 4
scrollback (history) buffer to 200 lines.
.It Va cron_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr cron 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va cron_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr cron 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/cron ) .
.It Va cron_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va cron_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to
.Xr cron 8 .
.It Va cron_dst
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable the special handling of transitions to and from the
Daylight Saving Time in
.Xr cron 8
(equivalent to using the flag
.Fl s ) .
.It Va lpd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to
.Xr lpd 8
(default
.Pa /usr/sbin/lpd ) .
.It Va lpd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr lpd 8
daemon at system boot time.
.It Va lpd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va lpd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr lpd 8
daemon.
.It Va chkprintcap_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr chkprintcap 8
command before starting the
.Xr lpd 8
daemon.
.It Va chkprintcap_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va lpd_enable
and
.Va chkprintcap_enable
are set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr chkprintcap 8
program.
The default is
.Dq Li -d ,
which causes missing directories to be created.
.It Va mta_start_script
.Pq Vt str
This variable specifies the full path to the script to run to start
a mail transfer agent.
The default is
.Pa /etc/rc.sendmail .
The
.Va sendmail_*
variables which
.Pa /etc/rc.sendmail
uses are documented in the
.Xr rc.sendmail 8
manual page.
.It Va dumpdev
.Pq Vt str
Indicates the device (usually a swap partition) to which a crash dump
should be written in the event of a system crash.
If the value of this variable is
.Dq Li AUTO ,
the first suitable swap device listed in
.Pa /etc/fstab
will be used as dump device.
Otherwise, the value of this variable is passed as the argument to
.Xr dumpon 8 .
To disable crash dumps, set this variable to
.Dq Li NO .
.It Va dumpdir
.Pq Vt str
When the system reboots after a crash and a crash dump is found on the
device specified by the
.Va dumpdev
variable,
.Xr savecore 8
will save that crash dump and a copy of the kernel to the directory
specified by the
.Va dumpdir
variable.
The default value is
.Pa /var/crash .
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to not run
.Xr savecore 8
at boot time when
.Va dumpdir
is set.
.It Va savecore_flags
.Pq Vt str
If crash dumps are enabled, these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr savecore 8
utility.
.It Va enable_quotas
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to turn on user disk quotas on system startup via the
.Xr quotaon 8
command.
.It Va check_quotas
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable user disk quota checking via the
.Xr quotacheck 8
command.
.It Va accounting_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable system accounting through the
.Xr accton 8
facility.
.It Va ibcs2_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable iBCS2 (SCO) binary emulation at system initial boot
time.
.It Va ibcs2_loaders
.Pq Vt str
If not set to
.Dq Li NO
and if
.Va ibcs2_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
this specifies a list of additional iBCS2 loaders to enable.
.It Va linux_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable Linux/ELF binary emulation at system initial
boot time.
.It Va osf1_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable OSF/1 (Digital UNIX) binary emulation at system
initial boot time.
(alpha)
.It Va svr4_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enable SysVR4 emulation at boot time.
.It Va sysvipc_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
load System V IPC primitives at boot time.
.It Va clear_tmp_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to have
.Pa /tmp
cleaned at startup.
.It Va ldconfig_paths
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of shared library paths to use with
.Xr ldconfig 8 .
NOTE:
.Pa /usr/lib
will always be added first, so it need not appear in this list.
.It Va ldconfig_paths_aout
.Pq Vt str
Set to the list of shared library paths to use with
.Xr ldconfig 8
legacy
.Xr a.out 5
support.
.It Va ldconfig_insecure
.Pq Vt bool
The
.Xr ldconfig 8
utility normally refuses to use directories
which are writable by anyone except root.
Set this variable to
.Dq Li YES
to disable that security check during system startup.
.It Va kern_securelevel_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to set the kernel security level at system startup.
.It Va kern_securelevel
.Pq Vt int
The kernel security level to set at startup.
The allowed range of
.Ar value
ranges from \-1 (the compile time default) to 3 (the
most secure).
See
.Xr init 8
for the list of possible security levels and their effect
on system operation.
.It Va sshd_program
.Pq Vt str
Path to the SSH server program
.Pa ( /usr/sbin/sshd
is the default).
.It Va sshd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to start
.Xr sshd 8
at system boot time.
.It Va sshd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va sshd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr sshd 8
daemon.
.It Va usbd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run the
.Xr usbd 8
daemon at boot time.
.It Va usbd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va usbd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags passed to the
.Xr usbd 8
daemon.
.It Va watchdogd_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
start the
.Xr watchdogd 8
daemon at boot time.
This requires that the kernel have been compiled with a
.Xr watchdog 4
compatible device.
.It Va watchdogd_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va watchdogd_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags passed to the
.Xr watchdogd 8
daemon.
.It Va performance_cx_lowest
.Pq Vt str
CPU idle state to use while on AC power.
The string
.Dq Li LOW
indicates that
.Xr acpi 4
should use the lowest power state available while
.Dq Li HIGH
indicates that the lowest latency state (less power savings) should be used.
.It Va performance_cpu_freq
.Pq Vt str
CPU clock frequency to use while on AC power.
The string
.Dq Li LOW
indicates that
.Xr cpufreq 4
should use the lowest frequency available while
.Dq Li HIGH
indicates that the highest frequency (less power savings) should be used.
.It Va economy_cx_lowest
.Pq Vt str
CPU idle state to use when off AC power.
The string
.Dq Li LOW
indicates that
.Xr acpi 4
should use the lowest power state available while
.Dq Li HIGH
indicates that the lowest latency state (less power savings) should be used.
.It Va economy_cpu_freq
.Pq Vt str
CPU clock frequency to use when off AC power.
The string
.Dq Li LOW
indicates that
.Xr cpufreq 4
should use the lowest frequency available while
.Dq Li HIGH
indicates that the highest frequency (less power savings) should be used.
.It Va jail_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
any configured jails will not be started.
.It Va jail_list
.Pq Vt str
A space separated list of names for jails.
This is purely a configuration aid to help identify and
configure multiple jails.
The names specified in this list will be used to
identify settings common to an instance of a jail.
Assuming that the jail in question was named
.Li vjail ,
you would have the following dependant variables:
.Bd -literal
jail_vjail_hostname="jail.example.com"
jail_vjail_ip="192.168.1.100"
jail_vjail_rootdir="/var/jails/vjail/root"
jail_vjail_exec="/bin/sh /etc/rc"
.Ed
.Pp
The last one is optional.
It defaults to
.Pa /etc/rc
if it is not set.
.It Va jail_set_hostname_allow
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
do not allow the root user in a jail to set its hostname.
.It Va jail_socket_unixiproute_only
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
do not allow any protocol,
besides TCP/IP,
to be used within a jail.
.It Va jail_sysvipc_allow
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
allow applications within a jail to use System V IPC.
.It Va unaligned_print
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li NO ,
unaligned access warnings will not be printed.
(alpha)
.\" ----- isdn settings ---------------------------------
.It Va isdn_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
starts the
.Xr isdnd 8
daemon
at system boot time.
.It Va isdn_flags
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Fl d Ns Cm n Fl d Ns Li 0x1f9
by default.
Additional flags to pass to
.Xr isdnd 8
(but see
.Va isdn_fsdev
and
.Va isdn_ttype
for certain tunable parameters).
.It Va isdn_ttype
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li cons25
by default.
The terminal type of the output device when
.Xr isdnd 8
operates in full-screen mode.
.It Va isdn_screenflags
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
The video mode for full-screen mode (only for
.Xr syscons 4
console driver, see
.Xr vidcontrol 1
for valid modes).
.It Va isdn_fsdev
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
The output device for
.Xr isdnd 8
in full-screen mode (or
.Dq Li NO
for daemon mode).
.It Va isdn_trace
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
enables the ISDN protocol trace utility
.Xr isdntrace 8
at system boot time.
.It Va isdn_traceflags
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Fl f Pa /var/tmp/isdntrace0
by default.
Flags for
.Xr isdntrace 8 .
.\" -----------------------------------------------------
.It Va pcvt_verbose
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
When set to
.Dq Li YES ,
verbose messages about the actions done by the start script are displayed.
.Em Note :
the
.Xr pcvt 4
driver must be compiled into the kernel before the
.Xr pcvt 4
related
options described here take any effect.
.It Va pcvt_keymap
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Use this to configure a national keyboard mapping found in the
.Pa /usr/share/misc/keycap.pcvt
file of keyboard mappings.
(See also the manual pages
.Xr keycap 5
and
.Xr keycap 3
for usage of
.Xr pcvt 4 Ns 's
keycap database and the manual page
.Xr kcon 1
option
.Fl m
for national keyboard mapping configuration.)
.It Va pcvt_keydel
.Pq Vt int
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Used to set the keyboard key repeat delay value.
Valid values are
in the range 0..3 for delay values of 250, 500, 750 and 1000 msec.
(See also the
.Xr kcon 1
manual page.)
.It Va pcvt_keyrate
.Pq Vt int
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Used to set the keyboard key repetition rate value.
Valid values are
in the range 0..31 for repetition values of 2..30 characters per second.
.It Va pcvt_keyrepeat
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable automatic keyboard key repeating.
.It Va pcvt_force24
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to force
.Xr pcvt 4
to use 24 lines only (in 25 lines mode) for compatibility
with the original
.Tn VT220
terminal.
.It Va pcvt_hpext
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to enable the display and functionality of function key labels (as found
on
.Tn Hewlett-Packard
terminals such as the
.Tn HP2392A
and the
.Tn HP700/92
in
.Tn ANSI
mode).
.It Va pcvt_lines
.Pq Vt int
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default resulting in a value of 25.
Used to set the number of lines on the screen.
For VGA displays, valid
values are 25, 28, 40 and 50 lines.
(See also the
.Xr scon 1
manual page.)
.It Va pcvt_blanktime
.Pq Vt int
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Used to set the screen saver timeout in seconds for values greater than
zero.
.It Va pcvt_cursorh
.Pq Vt int
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Used to set the cursor top scanline.
(See also the
.Xr cursor 1
manual page.)
.It Va pcvt_cursorl
.Pq Vt int
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Used to set the cursor bottom scanline.
.It Va pcvt_monohigh
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
by default.
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to set intensity to high on monochrome monitors.
(See also the
.Xr scon 1
manual page, option
.Fl p ,
for more information on changing VGA palette
values.)
.It Va harvest_interrupt
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to use hardware interrupts as an entropy source.
Refer to
.Xr random 4
for more information.
.It Va harvest_ethernet
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to use LAN traffic as an entropy source.
Refer to
.Xr random 4
for more information.
.It Va harvest_p_to_p
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to use serial line traffic as an entropy source.
Refer to
.Xr random 4
for more information.
.It Va entropy_dir
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to disable caching entropy via
.Xr cron 8 .
Otherwise set to the directory used to store entropy files in.
.It Va entropy_file
.Pq Vt str
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to disable caching entropy through reboots.
Otherwise set to the filename used to store cached entropy through
reboots.
This file should be located on the root file system to seed the
.Xr random 4
device as early as possible in the boot process.
.It Va entropy_save_sz
.Pq Vt int
Size of the entropy cache files saved by
.Nm save-entropy
periodically.
.It Va entropy_save_num
.Pq Vt int
Number of entropy cache files to save by
.Nm save-entropy
periodically.
.It Va ipsec_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to run
.Xr setkey 8
on
.Va ipsec_file
at boot time.
.It Va ipsec_file
.Pq Vt str
Configuration file for
.Xr setkey 8 .
.It Va dmesg_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to save
.Xr dmesg 8
to
.Pa /var/run/dmesg.boot
on boot.
.It Va rcshutdown_timeout
.Pq Vt int
If set, start a watchdog timer in the background which will terminate
.Pa rc.shutdown
if
.Xr shutdown 8
has not completed within the specified time (in seconds).
.It Va virecover_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li NO
to prevent the system from trying to
recover pre-maturely terminated
.Xr vi 1
sessions.
.It Va ugidfw_enable
.Pq Vt bool
Set to
.Dq Li YES
to load the
.Xr mac_bsdextended 4
module upon system initialization and load a default
ruleset file.
.It Va bsdextended_script
.Pq Vt str
The default
.Xr mac_bsdextended 4
ruleset file to load.
The default value of this variable is
.Pa /etc/rc.bsdextended .
.It Va newsyslog_enable
.Pq Vt bool
If set to
.Dq Li YES ,
run
.Xr newsyslog 8
command at startup.
.It Va newsyslog_flags
.Pq Vt str
If
.Va newsyslog_enable
is set to
.Dq Li YES ,
these are the flags to pass to the
.Xr newsyslog 8
program.
The default is
.Dq Li -CN ,
which causes log files flagged with a
.Cm C
to be created.
.It Va ramdisk_units
.Pq Vt str
A list of one or more ramdisk units to configure with
.Xr mdconfig 8
and
.Xr newfs 8
in time to be mounted from
.Xr fstab 5 .
Each listed unit
.Ar X
must specify at least a
.Ar type
in a
.Va ramdisk_ Ns Ao Ar X Ac Ns Va _config
variable.
.It Va ramdisk_ Ns Ao Ar X Ac Ns Va _config
.Pq Vt str
Arguments to
.Xr mdconfig 8
for ramdisk
.Ar X .
At minimum a
.Fl t Ar type
must be specified, where
.Ar type
must be one of
.Cm malloc
or
.Cm swap .
.It Va ramdisk_ Ns Ao Ar X Ac Ns Va _newfs
.Pq Vt str
Optional arguments passed to
.Xr newfs 8
to initialize ramdisk
.Ar X .
.It Va ramdisk_ Ns Ao Ar X Ac Ns Va _owner
.Pq Vt str
An ownership specification passed to
.Xr chown 8
after the specified ramdisk unit
.Ar X
has been mounted.
Both the
.Xr md 4
device and the mount point will be changed.
.It Va ramdisk_ Ns Ao Ar X Ac Ns Va _perms
.Pq Vt str
A mode string passed to
.Xr chmod 1
after the specified ramdisk unit
.Ar X
has been mounted.
Both the
.Xr md 4
device and the mount point will be changed.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /etc/defaults/rc.conf" -compact
.It Pa /etc/defaults/rc.conf
.It Pa /etc/rc.conf
.It Pa /etc/rc.conf.local
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr catman 1 ,
.Xr chmod 1 ,
.Xr gdb 1 ,
.Xr info 1 ,
.Xr kbdcontrol 1 ,
.Xr makewhatis 1 ,
.Xr vi 1 ,
.Xr vidcontrol 1 ,
.Xr ip 4 ,
.Xr kld 4 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr udp 4 ,
.Xr exports 5 ,
.Xr motd 5 ,
.Xr newsyslog.conf 5 ,
.Xr accton 8 ,
.Xr amd 8 ,
.Xr apm 8 ,
.Xr atm 8 ,
.Xr chkprintcap 8 ,
.Xr chown 8 ,
.Xr cron 8 ,
.Xr dhclient 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr inetd 8 ,
.Xr isdnd 8 ,
.Xr isdntrace 8 ,
.Xr kldxref 8 ,
.Xr lpd 8 ,
.Xr mdconfig 8 ,
.Xr mdmfs 8 ,
.Xr mountd 8 ,
.Xr moused 8 ,
.Xr mrouted 8 ,
.Xr named 8 ,
.Xr newfs 8 ,
.Xr newsyslog 8 ,
.Xr nfsd 8 ,
.Xr ntpd 8 ,
.Xr ntpdate 8 ,
.Xr pcnfsd 8 ,
.Xr powerd 8 ,
.Xr quotacheck 8 ,
.Xr quotaon 8 ,
.Xr rc 8 ,
.Xr rc.sendmail 8 ,
.Xr route 8 ,
.Xr routed 8 ,
.Xr rpcbind 8 ,
.Xr rpc.lockd 8 ,
.Xr rpc.statd 8 ,
.Xr rwhod 8 ,
.Xr savecore 8 ,
.Xr sshd 8 ,
.Xr swapon 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr syslogd 8 ,
.Xr timed 8 ,
.Xr usbd 8 ,
.Xr yp 8 ,
.Xr ypbind 8 ,
.Xr ypserv 8 ,
.Xr ypset 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
file appeared in
.Fx 2.2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Jordan K. Hubbard .
