''' $FreeBSD: src/gnu/libexec/uucp/contrib/uurate.man,v 1.6 1999/08/28 04:58:22 peter Exp $
.TH uurate 1
.SH NAME
uurate \- Report Taylor UUCP statistics
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR uurate " [ " "\-acdefhipqtvx" " ] [ " "\-s "
.I host
.RI " ] [ " "\-I "
.I config
.RI " ][ " "logfile..." " ] "
.PP
or simply,
.PP
.B uurate
.PP
for a traffic summary report.
.SH DESCRIPTION
The
.I uurate
command provides tabular summary reports on the operation of the
Taylor UUCP system. Data is taken from the currently active log
files, standard input, or from a list of log files given on the
command line. Output is in the form of tabular reports summarizing
call, file transfer, and command execution
.RI "("  "uuxqt" ")"
activity.
.PP
The log and stats files given to
.I uurate
must be in the ``Taylor'' or ``V2'' format. Also, note that call and file
transfer activities are logged in separate files, nominally called
.I Log
and
.I Stats,
respectively. For reports to be meaningful, the
.I Log
and
.I Stats
files should be given to
.I uurate
together, and cover the same time period.
.PP
If neither the
.B \-i
or
.B \-I
option nor any
.I logfile
options are given,
.I uurate
defaults to taking its input from the current Taylor
.I Log
and
.I Stats
files. The names are either as defined at compilation time, in case
there is no config file, or taken from the arguments of the keywords
.I logfile
and
.I statfile
when encountered in the config file.
This is the normal mode of operation.
.PP
The reporting options described below can be used to select
the set of reports desired. If no options are given, a summary
report is displayed. If there is no relevant data for a particular
report or host, that report or host will be suppressed.
.SH OPTIONS
The following options may be given to
.I uurate:
.TP 5
.B \-a
All reports. Identical to
.B \-cfexp.
.TP 5
.B \-c
Report on call statistics. Requires data from a
.I Log
file.
.TP 5
.B \-d
will print the default config file to be used.
.TP 5
.B \-e
Report on efficiency (total connect time versus time spent transferring
files). Requires data from both a
.I Log
and a
.I Stats
file, and they must span the same time period.
.TP 5
.B \-f
Report on file transfer statistics. Requires data from a
.I Stats
file.
.TP 5
.B \-h
will print a short help information.
.TP 5
.B \-i
tells uurate to read any logfile information from standard input.
.TP 5
.B \-p
report on protocol errors and packets sent/received
.TP 5
.B \-q
do not print the Environment information,
.TP 5
.B \-t
All reports. Identical to
.B \-cfexp.
plus the
.B Compact summary.
.TP 5
.B \-v
will print the version id string
.TP 5
.B \-x
Report on remote execution requests (e.g.,
.IR rmail ")."
Requires data from a
.I Log
file.
.TP 5
.BI "\-s " "host"
Restrict report output to
.I host.
.TP 5
.BI "\-I " "config file"
an alternate config file may be passed by this option.
.SH "DESCRIPTION OF REPORTS"
There are four reports available: the call, file transfer, efficiency,
and remote execution reports. Each may be selected by a command line
option. All reports may be selected via the options
.B \-a
or
.B \-t.
If no report selection options are given,
.I uurate
displays a compact traffic summary report (see below).
.SS "Summary report"
If no report options are given,
.I uurate
displays a traffic summary report. This is particularly useful in daily
.I cron
jobs which report on errors and the like. Traffic statistics for each
active system is reported on a single line. If more than one system was
active, a 'totals' line is included at the end of the report.
.SS "Protocol packet report"
The protocol report gives statistics on min/max packet and window sizes
used during transmission. Further on data is collected for packets
transferred. The data is collected for each host/protocol type.
The fields are described below:
.PP
.br
.nf
.in +.3i
.ta 1.0i
.BR "site	" "UUCP node name of neighbor host system,"
.BR "typ	" "Type of protocol used"
.BR "Min	" "minimum packet/window size"
.BR "Max	" "maximum packet/window size"
.BR "sent	" "packets sent"
.BR "resent	" "packets resent"
.BR "received	" "packets received"
.in -.3
.SS "Protocol error report"
The protocol report gives statistics on packet errors
during transmission. The data is collected for each host/protocol type.
The fields are described below:
.PP
.br
.nf
.in +.3i
.ta 1.5i
.BR "site	" "UUCP node name of neighbor host system,"
.BR "typ	" "Type of protocol used"
.BR "header	" "number of errors in header"
.BR "checksum	" "number of checksum errors"
.BR "order	" "number of order errors"
.BR "resent	" "number packets resent"
.BR "rem-reject	" "packets that the remote site rejected"
.in -.3
.SS "Call report"
The call report gives statistics on inbound and outbound calls for
each active host system. The fields are described below:
.PP
.br
.nf
.in +.3i
.ta 1.0i
.BR "site	" "UUCP node name of neighbor host system,"
.BR "succ.	" "Successful calls attempted to/by that system,"
.BR "failed	" "Failed calls to/by that system,"
.BR "total	" "Total calls to/by that system,"
.BR "time	" "Collected connect time (hh:mm:ss) for all calls,"
.in -.3
.SS "File transfer reports"
The file transfer reports give statistics on inbound and
outbound file transfers (regardless of which end initiated the transfer)
for each active host system. There are two reports, one for files
sent to the remote system and one for files received from the remote
system. The fields in each report are described below:
.PP
.br
.nf
.in +.3i
.ta 1.0i
.BR "site	  " "UUCP node name of neighbor host system"
.BR "files	  " "Number of files transferred"
.BR "Bytes/1000	  " "Total size of files transferred given in thousands"
.BR "xfr time	  " "Total time (hh:mm:ss) spent on transfer the files,"
.BR "B/sec	  " "Average transfer rate (bytes/sec)."
.in -.3
.SS "Efficiency report"
The efficiency report describes the utilization of the links
to each active remote system, giving the ratio of total connect time
to the time spent actually transferring files.
The fields are described below:
.PP
.br
.nf
.in +.3i
.ta 1.0i
.BR "site	 " "UUCP node name of neighbor host system"
.BR "connected	 " "Total connect time for that system (turn-around)"
.BR "xfr time	 " "Total file transfer time for that system"
.BR "overhead	 " "Connect time not used to transfer files,"
.BR "eff. %	 " "Ratio of connect time to transfer time (xfer*100/conn)"
.in -.3
.SS "Command executions report"
The remote execution report describes remotely
requested command executions from each active host system, like
.I rmail
and
.IR rnews "."
Up to eight command names are displayed. If there are more, the
rest will be put together in an `Misc.' column.
The fields are described below:
.PP
.br
.nf
.in +.3i
.ta 1.0i
.BR "site	  " "UUCP node name of neighbor host system,"
.BR "(command)	  " "Number of requests of this command,"
.BR "Misc.	  " "Number of other requests, if more than eight."
.in -.3i
.SS FILES
The file names below may be changed at compilation time or by the
configuration file, so these are only approximations.
.br
.nf
.in +.3in
.ta 2.2i
.IR "/usr/spool/uucp/Log	" "V2/Taylor format call/execution log,"
.IR "/usr/spool/uucp/Stats	" "V2/Taylor format file transfer log."
.SS "SEE ALSO"
.IR uucico "(8)"
.SS BUGS
Does not understand other than V2/TAYLOR logging formats. Anyone care to
volunteer to add the not mentioned?
.PP
Scanning the arguments of logfile and statfile keywords 
in config should handle lines continued with the backslash as well.
.PP
The
.B failfm
field in the call statistics table is always zero, unless
something really serious happens, e.g. uucico got SIGQUIT or
the whole system crashed.
.SS AUTHOR
Robert B. Denny (denny@alisa.com).
.br
Loosely based on the DECUS UUCP program
.I uurate
by Mark Pizzolato.
.br
Modified by Stephan Niemz (stephan@sunlab.ka.sub.org).
.br
Modified by Klaus Dahlenburg (kdburg@incoahe.hanse.de).
