@node  Acknowledgments, Index, Resolving frequent problems, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@appendix Acknowledgments

People from the MIT Athena project wrote the original code that this is
based on. @w{Kerberos 4} @w{patch-level 9} was stripped of both the
encryption functions and the calls to them. This was exported from the
US as the ``Bones'' release.  Eric Young put back the calls and hooked
in his libdes, thereby creating the ``eBones'' release.
@cindex Bones
@cindex eBones

The ``rcmd'' programs where initially developed at the University of
California at Berkeley and then hacked on by the FreeBSD and NetBSD
projects.

Berkeley also wrote @code{ftp}, @code{ftpd}, @code{telnet}, and
@code{telnetd}.  The authentication and encryption code of @code{telnet}
and @code{telnetd} was added by David Borman (then of Cray Research,
Inc).  The encryption code was removed when this was exported and then
added back by Juha Eskelinen, @code{<esc@@magic.fi>}.

The @code{popper} was also a Berkeley program initially.

The @code{login} has the same origins but has received code written by
Wietse Venema at Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands.

@code{movemail} was (at least partially) written by Jonathan Kamens,
@code{<jik@@security.ov.com>}, and is Copyright @copyright{} 1986, 1991,
1992, 1993, 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@code{xnlock} was originally written by Dan Heller in 1985 for sunview.
The X version was written by him in 1990.

Some of the functions in @file{libroken} also come from Berkeley by the
way of NetBSD/FreeBSD.

The code to handle the dynamic loading of the AFS module for AIX is
copyright @copyright{} 1992 HELIOS Software GmbH 30159 Hannover,
Germany.

@code{editline} was written by Simmule Turner and Rich Salz.

Bugfixes and code has been contributed by:
@table @asis
@item Derrick J Brashear
@code{<shadow@@dementia.org>}
@item Anders Gertz
@code{<gertz@@lysator.liu.se>}
@item Dejan Ilic
@code{<svedja@@lysator.liu.se>}
@item Kent Engström
@code{<kent@@lysator.liu.se>}
@item Simon Josefsson
@code{<jas@@pdc.kth.se>}
@item Robert Malmgren
@code{<rom@@incolumitas.se>}
@item Fredrik Ljungberg
@code{<flag@@it.kth.se>}
@item Lars Malinowsky
@code{<lama@@pdc.kth.se>}
@item Fabien Coelho
@code{<coelho@@cri.ensmp.fr>}
@item and we hope that those not mentioned here will forgive us.
@end table

Ian Marsh @code{<ianm@@sics.se>} removed the worst abuses of the English
language from this text.

Ilja Hallberg @code{<iha@@incolumitas.se>} is still promising to help us
finish the documentation.

This work was supported in part by SUNET and the Centre for Parallel
Computers at KTH.

The port to Windows 95/NT was supported by the Computer Council at KTH
and done by Jörgen Karlsson @code{<d93-jka@@nada.kth.se>}.

All the bugs were introduced by ourselves.

