@node Introduction, What is Kerberos?, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Introduction

This is an attempt at documenting the Kerberos 4 distribution from
Kungliga Tekniska Högskolan (the Royal Institute of Technology in
Stockholm, Sweden).  This distribution is based on eBones, but has been
improved in many ways. It is more portable, and several new features
have been added. It currently runs on the following systems:

@itemize @bullet
@item
AIX 4.1, 4.2
@item
BSD/OS 2.0, 2.1
@item
Digital UNIX 3.2, 4.0
@item
HP-UX 9, 10
@item
IRIX 4.0, 5.2, 5.3, 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4
@item
Linux 1.3, 2.0
@item
NetBSD 1.2
@item
FreeBSD 2.2
@item
SunOS 4.1
@item
SunOS 5.4/5.5 (aka Solaris 2.4/2.5)
@item
Ultrix 4.4
@item
Cray UNICOS 9.
@item
Fujitsu UXP/V 4.1.
@end itemize

Some part compile and work on:

@itemize @bullet
@item
OS/2 with EMX
@item
Windows 95/NT with gnu-win32 (with the proper amount of magic the
libraries should compile with Microsoft C as well)
@end itemize

It should work on anything that is almost POSIX, has an ANSI C
compiler, a dbm library (for the server side), and BSD Sockets.

A web-page is available at @kbd{http://www.pdc.kth.se/kth-krb/}.

@heading Bug reports

If you cannot build the programs or they do not behave as you think they
should, please send us a bug report.  The bug report should be sent to
@code{<kth-krb-bugs@@nada.kth.se>}.  Please include information on what
machine and operating system (including version) you are running, what
you are trying to do, what happens, what you think should have happened,
an example for us to repeat, the output you get when trying the example,
and a patch for the problem if you have one.  Please make any patches
with @code{diff -u} or @code{diff -c}.  The more detailed the bug report
is, the easier it will be for us to reproduce, understand, and fix it.

Suggestions, comments and other non bug reports are welcome.  Send them
to @code{<kth-krb@@nada.kth.se>}.

