'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" Copyright (c) 1994-1996 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" SCCS: @(#) CallDel.3 1.11 96/03/25 19:57:25
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_CallWhenDeleted 3 7.0 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_CallWhenDeleted, Tcl_DontCallWhenDeleted \- Arrange for callback when interpreter is deleted
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTcl_CallWhenDeleted\fR(\fIinterp\fR, \fIproc\fR, \fIclientData\fR)
.sp
\fBTcl_DontCallWhenDeleted\fR(\fIinterp\fR, \fIproc\fR, \fIclientData\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_InterpDeleteProc clientData
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter with which to associated callback.
.AP Tcl_InterpDeleteProc *proc in
Procedure to call when \fIinterp\fR is deleted.
.AP ClientData clientData in
Arbitrary one-word value to pass to \fIproc\fR.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTcl_CallWhenDeleted\fR arranges for \fIproc\fR to be called by
\fBTcl_DeleteInterp\fR if/when \fIinterp\fR is deleted at some future
time.  \fIProc\fR will be invoked just before the interpreter
is deleted, but the interpreter will still be valid at the
time of the call.
\fIProc\fR should have arguments and result that match the
type \fBTcl_InterpDeleteProc\fR:
.CS
typedef void Tcl_InterpDeleteProc(
	ClientData \fIclientData\fR,
	Tcl_Interp *\fIinterp\fR);
.CE
The \fIclientData\fR and \fIinterp\fR parameters are
copies of the \fIclientData\fR and \fIinterp\fR arguments given
to \fBTcl_CallWhenDeleted\fR.
Typically, \fIclientData\fR points to an application-specific
data structure that \fIproc\fR uses to perform cleanup when an
interpreter is about to go away.
\fIProc\fR does not return a value.
.PP
\fBTcl_DontCallWhenDeleted\fR cancels a previous call to
\fBTcl_CallWhenDeleted\fR with the same arguments, so that
\fIproc\fR won't be called after all when \fIinterp\fR is
deleted.
If there is no deletion callback that matches \fIinterp\fR,
\fIproc\fR, and \fIclientData\fR then the call to
\fBTcl_DontCallWhenDeleted\fR has no effect.

.SH KEYWORDS
callback, delete, interpreter
