'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1995-1996 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" SCCS: @(#) CrtSlave.3 1.22 97/06/10 17:52:33
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_CreateSlave 3 7.6 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_IsSafe, Tcl_MakeSafe, Tcl_CreateSlave, Tcl_GetSlave, Tcl_GetMaster, Tcl_GetInterpPath, Tcl_CreateAlias, Tcl_CreateAliasObj, Tcl_GetAlias, Tcl_GetAliasObj, Tcl_ExposeCommand, Tcl_HideCommand \- manage multiple Tcl interpreters, aliases and hidden commands.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTcl_IsSafe\fR(\fIinterp\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_MakeSafe\fR(\fIinterp\fR)
.sp
Tcl_Interp *
\fBTcl_CreateSlave\fR(\fIinterp, slaveName, isSafe\fR)
.sp
Tcl_Interp *
\fBTcl_GetSlave\fR(\fIinterp, slaveName\fR)
.sp
Tcl_Interp *
\fBTcl_GetMaster\fR(\fIinterp\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_GetInterpPath\fR(\fIaskingInterp, slaveInterp\fR)
.sp
.VS
int
\fBTcl_CreateAlias\fR(\fIslaveInterp, srcCmd, targetInterp, targetCmd, argc, argv\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_CreateAliasObj\fR(\fIslaveInterp, srcCmd, targetInterp, targetCmd, objc, objv\fR)
.VE
.sp
int
\fBTcl_GetAlias\fR(\fIinterp, srcCmd, targetInterpPtr, targetCmdPtr, argcPtr, argvPtr\fR)
.sp
.VS
int
\fBTcl_GetAliasObj\fR(\fIinterp, srcCmd, targetInterpPtr, targetCmdPtr, objcPtr, objvPtr\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_ExposeCommand\fR(\fIinterp, hiddenCmdName, cmdName\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_HideCommand\fR(\fIinterp, cmdName, hiddenCmdName\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_InterpDeleteProc **hiddenCmdName
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter in which to execute the specified command.
.AP char *slaveName in
Name of slave interpreter to create or manipulate.
.AP int isSafe in
If non-zero, a ``safe'' slave that is suitable for running untrusted code
is created, otherwise a trusted slave is created.
.AP Tcl_Interp *slaveInterp in
Interpreter to use for creating the source command for an alias (see
below).
.AP char *srcCmd in
Name of source command for alias.
.AP Tcl_Interp *targetInterp in
Interpreter that contains the target command for an alias.
.AP char *targetCmd in
Name of target command for alias in \fItargetInterp\fR.
.AP int argc in
Count of additional arguments to pass to the alias command.
.AP char **argv in
Vector of strings, the additional arguments to pass to the alias command.
This storage is owned by the caller.
.AP int objc in
Count of additional object arguments to pass to the alias object command.
.AP Tcl_Object **objv in
Vector of Tcl_Obj structures, the additional object argumenst to pass to
the alias object command.
This storage is owned by the caller.
.AP Tcl_Interp **targetInterpPtr in
Pointer to location to store the address of the interpreter where a target
command is defined for an alias.
.AP char **targetCmdPtr out
Pointer to location to store the address of the name of the target command
for an alias.
.AP int *argcPtr out
Pointer to location to store count of additional arguments to be passed to
the alias. The location is in storage owned by the caller.
.AP char ***argvPtr out
Pointer to location to store a vector of strings, the additional arguments
to pass to an alias. The location is in storage owned by the caller, the
vector of strings is owned by the called function.
.AP int *objcPtr out
Pointer to location to store count of additional object arguments to be
passed to the alias. The location is in storage owned by the caller.
.AP Tcl_Obj ***objvPtr out
Pointer to location to store a vector of Tcl_Obj structures, the additional
arguments to pass to an object alias command. The location is in storage
owned by the caller, the vector of Tcl_Obj structures is owned by the
called function.
.VS
.AP char *cmdName in
Name of an exposed command to hide or create.
.AP char *hiddenCmdName in
Name of a hidden command to create or expose.
.VE
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
These procedures are intended for access to the multiple interpreter
facility from inside C programs. They enable managing multiple interpreters
in a hierarchical relationship, and the management of aliases, commands
that when invoked in one interpreter execute a command in another
interpreter. The return value for those procedures that return an \fBint\fR
is either \fBTCL_OK\fR or \fBTCL_ERROR\fR. If \fBTCL_ERROR\fR is returned
then the \fBresult\fR field of the interpreter contains an error message.
.PP
\fBTcl_CreateSlave\fR creates a new interpreter as a slave of \fIinterp\fR.
It also creates a slave command named \fIslaveName\fR in \fIinterp\fR which 
allows \fIinterp\fR to manipulate the new slave. 
If \fIisSafe\fR is zero, the command creates a trusted slave in which Tcl
code has access to all the Tcl commands.
If it is \fB1\fR, the command creates a ``safe'' slave in which Tcl code
has access only to set of Tcl commands defined as ``Safe Tcl''; see the
manual entry for the Tcl \fBinterp\fR command for details.
If the creation of the new slave interpreter failed, \fBNULL\fR is returned.
.PP
\fBTcl_IsSafe\fR returns \fB1\fR if \fIinterp\fR is ``safe'' (was created
with the \fBTCL_SAFE_INTERPRETER\fR flag specified),
\fB0\fR otherwise.
.PP
\fBTcl_MakeSafe\fR makes \fIinterp\fR ``safe'' by removing all
non-core and core unsafe functionality. Note that if you call this after
adding some extension to an interpreter, all traces of that extension will
be removed from the interpreter.
.PP
\fBTcl_GetSlave\fR returns a pointer to a slave interpreter of
\fIinterp\fR. The slave interpreter is identified by \fIslaveName\fR.
If no such slave interpreter exists, \fBNULL\fR is returned.
.PP
\fBTcl_GetMaster\fR returns a pointer to the master interpreter of
\fIinterp\fR. If \fIinterp\fR has no master (it is a
top-level interpreter) then \fBNULL\fR is returned.
.PP
\fBTcl_GetInterpPath\fR sets the \fIresult\fR field in \fIaskingInterp\fR
to the relative path between \fIaskingInterp\fR and \fIslaveInterp\fR;
\fIslaveInterp\fR must be a slave of \fIaskingInterp\fR. If the computation
of the relative path succeeds, \fBTCL_OK\fR is returned, else
\fBTCL_ERROR\fR is returned and the \fIresult\fR field in
\fIaskingInterp\fR contains the error message.
.PP
.VS
\fBTcl_CreateAlias\fR creates an object command named \fIsrcCmd\fR in
\fIslaveInterp\fR that when invoked, will cause the command \fItargetCmd\fR
to be invoked in \fItargetInterp\fR. The arguments specified by the strings
contained in \fIargv\fR are always prepended to any arguments supplied in the
invocation of \fIsrcCmd\fR and passed to \fItargetCmd\fR.
This operation returns \fBTCL_OK\fR if it succeeds, or \fBTCL_ERROR\fR if
it fails; in that case, an error message is left in the object result
of \fIslaveInterp\fR.
Note that there are no restrictions on the ancestry relationship (as
created by \fBTcl_CreateSlave\fR) between \fIslaveInterp\fR and
\fItargetInterp\fR. Any two interpreters can be used, without any
restrictions on how they are related.
.PP
\fBTcl_CreateAliasObj\fR is similar to \fBTcl_CreateAliasObj\fR except 
that it takes a vector of objects to pass as additional arguments instead
of a vector of strings.
.VE
.PP
\fBTcl_GetAlias\fR returns information about an alias \fIaliasName\fR
in \fIinterp\fR. Any of the result fields can be \fBNULL\fR, in
which case the corresponding datum is not returned. If a result field is
non\-\fBNULL\fR, the address indicated is set to the corresponding datum.
For example, if \fItargetNamePtr\fR is non\-\fBNULL\fR it is set to a
pointer to the string containing the name of the target command.
.VS
.PP
\fBTcl_GetAliasObj\fR is similar to \fBTcl_GetAlias\fR except that it
returns a pointer to a vector of Tcl_Obj structures instead of a vector of
strings.
.PP
\fBTcl_ExposeCommand\fR moves the command named \fIhiddenCmdName\fR from
the set of hidden commands to the set of exposed commands, renaming it to
\fIcmdName\fR. \fIHiddenCmdName\fR must be the name of an existing hidden
command, or the operation will return \fBTCL_ERROR\fR and deposit an error
message in the \fIresult\fR field in \fIinterp\fR.
If an exposed command named \fIcmdName\fR already exists,
the operation returns \fBTCL_ERROR\fR and leaves an error message in the
object result of \fIinterp\fR.
If the operation succeeds, it returns \fBTCL_OK\fR.
After executing this command, attempts to use \fIcmdName\fR in a call to
\fBTcl_Eval\fR or with the Tcl \fBeval\fR command will again succeed.
.PP
\fBTcl_HideCommand\fR moves the command named \fIcmdName\fR from the set of
exposed commands to the set of hidden commands, renaming it to
\fIhiddenCmdName\fR. \fICmdName\fR must be the name of an existing exposed
command, or the operation will return \fBTCL_ERROR\fR and leave an error
message in the object result of \fIinterp\fR.
If a hidden command named \fIhiddenCmdName\fR already
exists, the operation also returns \fBTCL_ERROR\fR and the \fIresult\fR
field in \fIinterp\fR contains an error message.
If the operation succeeds, it returns \fBTCL_OK\fR.
After executing this command, attempts to use \fIcmdName\fR in a call to
\fBTcl_Eval\fR or with the Tcl \fBeval\fR command will fail.
.PP
.SH "SEE ALSO"
For a description of the Tcl interface to multiple interpreters, see
\fIinterp(n)\fR.

.SH KEYWORDS
alias, command, exposed commands, hidden commands, interpreter, invoke,
master, slave, 

