'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1989-1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" Copyright (c) 1994-1996 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" SCCS: @(#) GetInt.3 1.12 96/03/25 20:03:44
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_GetInt 3 "" Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_GetInt, Tcl_GetDouble, Tcl_GetBoolean \- convert from string to integer, double, or boolean
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTcl_GetInt\fR(\fIinterp, string, intPtr\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_GetDouble\fR(\fIinterp, string, doublePtr\fR)
.sp
int
\fBTcl_GetBoolean\fR(\fIinterp, string, boolPtr\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_Interp *doublePtr
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Interpreter to use for error reporting.
.AP char *string in
Textual value to be converted.
.AP int *intPtr out
Points to place to store integer value converted from \fIstring\fR.
.AP double *doublePtr out
Points to place to store double-precision floating-point
value converted from \fIstring\fR.
.AP int *boolPtr out
Points to place to store boolean value (0 or 1) converted from \fIstring\fR.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
These procedures convert from strings to integers or double-precision
floating-point values or booleans (represented as 0- or 1-valued
integers).  Each of the procedures takes a \fIstring\fR argument,
converts it to an internal form of a particular type, and stores
the converted value at the location indicated by the procedure's
third argument.  If all goes well, each of the procedures returns
TCL_OK.  If \fIstring\fR doesn't have the proper syntax for the
desired type then TCL_ERROR is returned, an error message is left
in \fIinterp->result\fR, and nothing is stored at *\fIintPtr\fR
or *\fIdoublePtr\fR or *\fIboolPtr\fR.
.PP
\fBTcl_GetInt\fR expects \fIstring\fR to consist of a collection
of integer digits, optionally signed and optionally preceded by
white space.  If the first two characters of \fIstring\fR are ``0x''
then \fIstring\fR is expected to be in hexadecimal form;  otherwise,
if the first character of \fIstring\fR is ``0'' then \fIstring\fR
is expected to be in octal form;  otherwise, \fIstring\fR is
expected to be in decimal form.
.PP
\fBTcl_GetDouble\fR expects \fIstring\fR to consist of a floating-point
number, which is:  white space;  a sign; a sequence of digits;  a
decimal point;  a sequence of digits;  the letter ``e'';  and a
signed decimal exponent.  Any of the fields may be omitted, except that
the digits either before or after the decimal point must be present
and if the ``e'' is present then it must be followed by the
exponent number.
.PP
\fBTcl_GetBoolean\fR expects \fIstring\fR to specify a boolean
value.  If \fIstring\fR is any of \fB0\fR, \fBfalse\fR,
\fBno\fR, or \fBoff\fR, then \fBTcl_GetBoolean\fR stores a zero
value at \fI*boolPtr\fR.
If \fIstring\fR is any of \fB1\fR, \fBtrue\fR, \fByes\fR, or \fBon\fR,
then 1 is stored at \fI*boolPtr\fR.
Any of these values may be abbreviated, and upper-case spellings
are also acceptable.

.SH KEYWORDS
boolean, conversion, double, floating-point, integer
