'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1989-1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" Copyright (c) 1994-1997 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" SCCS: @(#) PrintDbl.3 1.8 97/02/18 16:34:51
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_PrintDouble 3 8.0 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_PrintDouble \- Convert floating value to string
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTcl_PrintDouble\fR(\fIinterp, value, dst\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_Interp *interp
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
.VS
Before Tcl 8.0, the \fBtcl_precision\fR variable in this interpreter
controlled the conversion.  As of Tcl 8.0, this argument is ignored and
17 digits of precision are always used for conversion.
.VE
.AP double value in
Floating-point value to be converted.
.AP char *dst out
Where to store string representing \fIvalue\fR.  Must have at
least TCL_DOUBLE_SPACE characters of storage.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTcl_PrintDouble\fR generates a string that represents the value
of \fIvalue\fR and stores it in memory at the location given by
\fIdst\fR.  It uses \fB%g\fR format to generate the string, with one
special twist: the string is guaranteed to contain either
a ``.'' or an ``e'' so that it doesn't look like an integer.  Where
\fB%g\fR would generate an integer with no decimal point, \fBTcl_PrintDouble\fR
adds ``.0''.

.SH KEYWORDS
conversion, double-precision, floating-point, string
