'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1997 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" SCCS: SCCS: @(#) RecEvalObj.3 1.1 97/07/29 18:31:21
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_RecordAndEvalObj 3 8.0 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_RecordAndEvalObj \- save command on history list before evaluating
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTcl_RecordAndEvalObj\fR(\fIinterp, cmdPtr, flags\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_Interp *interp;
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Tcl interpreter in which to evaluate command.
.AP Tcl_Obj *cmdPtr in
Points to a Tcl object containing a command (or sequence of commands)
to execute.
.AP int flags in
An OR'ed combination of flag bits.  TCL_NO_EVAL means record the
command but don't evaluate it.  TCL_EVAL_GLOBAL means evaluate
the command at global level instead of the current stack level.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTcl_RecordAndEvalObj\fR is invoked to record a command as an event
on the history list and then execute it using \fBTcl_EvalObj\fR
(or \fBTcl_GlobalEvalObj\fR if the TCL_EVAL_GLOBAL bit is set
in \fIflags\fR).
It returns a completion code such as TCL_OK just like \fBTcl_EvalObj\fR,
as well as a result object containing additional information
(a result value or error message)
that can be retrieved using \fBTcl_GetObjResult\fR.
If you don't want the command recorded on the history list then
you should invoke \fBTcl_EvalObj\fR instead of \fBTcl_RecordAndEvalObj\fR.
Normally \fBTcl_RecordAndEvalObj\fR is only called with top-level
commands typed by the user, since the purpose of history is to
allow the user to re-issue recently-invoked commands.
If the \fIflags\fR argument contains the TCL_NO_EVAL bit then
the command is recorded without being evaluated.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
Tcl_EvalObj, Tcl_GetObjResult

.SH KEYWORDS
command, event, execute, history, interpreter, object, record
