'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1989-1993 The Regents of the University of California.
'\" Copyright (c) 1994-1996 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" SCCS: @(#) RecordEval.3 1.16 96/03/25 20:06:06
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_RecordAndEval 3 7.4 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_RecordAndEval \- save command on history list before evaluating
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
int
\fBTcl_RecordAndEval\fR(\fIinterp, cmd, eval\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_Interp *interp;
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
Tcl interpreter in which to evaluate command.
.AP char *cmd in
Command (or sequence of commands) to execute.
.AP int flags in
.VS
An OR'ed combination of flag bits.  TCL_NO_EVAL means record the
command but don't evaluate it.  TCL_EVAL_GLOBAL means evaluate
the command at global level instead of the current stack level.
.VE
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
\fBTcl_RecordAndEval\fR is invoked to record a command as an event
on the history list and then execute it using \fBTcl_Eval\fR
.VS
(or \fBTcl_GlobalEval\fR if the TCL_EVAL_GLOBAL bit is set in \fIflags\fR).
.VE
It returns a completion code such as TCL_OK just like \fBTcl_Eval\fR
and it leaves information in \fIinterp->result\fR.
If you don't want the command recorded on the history list then
you should invoke \fBTcl_Eval\fR instead of \fBTcl_RecordAndEval\fR.
Normally \fBTcl_RecordAndEval\fR is only called with top-level
commands typed by the user, since the purpose of history is to
allow the user to re-issue recently-invoked commands.
If the \fIflags\fR argument contains the TCL_NO_EVAL bit then
the command is recorded without being evaluated.

.SH KEYWORDS
command, event, execute, history, interpreter, record
