'\"
'\" Copyright (c) 1995-1996 Sun Microsystems, Inc.
'\"
'\" See the file "license.terms" for information on usage and redistribution
'\" of this file, and for a DISCLAIMER OF ALL WARRANTIES.
'\" 
'\" SCCS: @(#) StaticPkg.3 1.3 96/03/15 08:29:37
'\" 
.so man.macros
.TH Tcl_StaticPackage 3 7.5 Tcl "Tcl Library Procedures"
.BS
.SH NAME
Tcl_StaticPackage \- make a statically linked package available via the \fBload\fR command
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
\fB#include <tcl.h>\fR
.sp
\fBTcl_StaticPackage\fR(\fIinterp, pkgName, initProc, safeInitProc\fR)
.SH ARGUMENTS
.AS Tcl_PackageInitProc *safeInitProc
.AP Tcl_Interp *interp in
If not NULL, points to an interpreter into which the package has
already been loaded (i.e., the caller has already invoked the
appropriate initialization procedure).  NULL means the package
hasn't yet been incorporated into any interpreter.
.AP char *pkgName in
Name of the package;  should be properly capitalized (first letter
upper-case, all others lower-case).
.AP Tcl_PackageInitProc *initProc in
Procedure to invoke to incorporate this package into a trusted
interpreter.
.AP Tcl_PackageInitProc *safeInitProc in
Procedure to call to incorporate this package into a safe interpreter
(one that will execute untrusted scripts).   NULL means the package
can't be used in safe interpreters.
.BE

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This procedure may be invoked to announce that a package has been
linked statically with a Tcl application and,  optionally, that it
has already been loaded into an interpreter.
\fBTcl_StaticPackage\fR is typically invoked by the \fBTcl_AppInit\fR
procedure for the application.
Once \fBTcl_StaticPackage\fR has been invoked for a package, it
may be loaded into interpreters using the \fBload\fR command.
.PP
When the \fBload\fR command is used later to load the package into
an interpreter, one of \fIinitProc\fR and \fIsafeInitProc\fR will
be invoked, depending on whether the target interpreter is safe
or not.
\fIinitProc\fR and \fIsafeInitProc\fR must both match the
following prototype:
.CS
typedef int Tcl_PackageInitProc(Tcl_Interp *\fIinterp\fR);
.CE
The \fIinterp\fR argument identifies the interpreter in which the
package is to be loaded.  The initialization procedure must return
\fBTCL_OK\fR or \fBTCL_ERROR\fR to indicate whether or not it completed
successfully;  in the event of an error it should set \fIinterp->result\fR
to point to an error message.
The result or error from the initialization procedure will be returned
as the result of the \fBload\fR command that caused the
initialization procedure to be invoked.

.SH KEYWORDS
initialization procedure, package, static linking
