@c GDB MANUAL configuration file.  
@c Copyright (c) 1993 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c NOTE: While the GDB manual is configurable (by changing these
@c switches), its configuration is ***NOT*** automatically tied in to
@c source configuration---because the authors expect that, save in
@c unusual cases, the most inclusive form of the manual is appropriate
@c no matter how the program itself is configured.
@c
@c The only automatically-varying variable is the GDB version number,
@c which the Makefile rewrites based on the VERSION variable from
@c `../Makefile.in'.  
@c 
@c GDB version number is recorded in the variable GDBVN
@include GDBvn.texi
@c
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@c PLATFORM FLAGS:
@clear GENERIC
@c
@c HP PA-RISC target:
@set HPPA
@c
@c Hitachi H8/300 target:
@clear H8
@c Hitachi H8/300 target ONLY:
@clear H8EXCLUSIVE
@c
@c remote MIPS target:
@clear MIPS
@c
@c SPARC target:
@clear SPARC
@c
@c AMD 29000 target:
@clear AMD29K
@c
@c Intel 960 target:
@clear I960
@c
@c Tandem ST2000 (phone switch) target:
@clear ST2000
@c
@c Zilog 8000 target:
@clear Z8K
@c
@c Wind River Systems VxWorks environment:
@clear VXWORKS
@c
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@c DOC FEATURE FLAGS:
@c 
@c Bare-board target?
@clear BARETARGET
@c
@c Restrict languages discussed to C?
@c This is backward.  As time permits, change this to language-specific
@c switches for what to include.
@clear CONLY
@c Discuss Fortran?
@clear FORTRAN
@c
@c Discuss Modula 2?
@clear MOD2
@c
@c Specifically for host machine running DOS?
@clear DOSHOST
@c
@c Talk about CPU simulator targets?
@clear SIMS
@c
@c Remote serial line settings of interest?
@set SERIAL
@c
@c Discuss features requiring Posix or similar OS environment?
@set POSIX
@c
@c Discuss remote serial debugging stub?
@clear REMOTESTUB
@c
@c Discuss gdbserver?
@set GDBSERVER
@c
@c Discuss gdbserve.nlm?
@set GDBSERVE
@c
@c Refrain from discussing how to configure sw and format doc?
@clear PRECONFIGURED
@c
@c Refrain from referring to unfree publications?
@set FSFDOC
@c
@c ----------------------------------------------------------------------
@c STRINGS:
@c
@c Name of GDB program.  Used also for (gdb) prompt string.
@set GDBP gdb
@c 
@c Name of GDB product.  Used in running text.
@set GDBN GDB
@c
@c Name of target.
@set TARGET HP 9000 Systems
@c 
@c Name of host.  Should not be used in generic configs, but generic
@c value may catch some flubs.
@set HOST machine specific
@c
@c Name of GCC product
@set NGCC GCC
@c 
@c Name of GCC program
@set GCC gcc

