.TH IBADDR 8 "June 18, 2007" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Diagnostics"

.SH NAME
ibaddr \- query InfiniBand address(es)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ibaddr
[\-d(ebug)] [\-D(irect)] [\-G(uid)] [\-l(id_show)] [\-g(id_show)] [\-C ca_name] [\-P ca_port] [\-t(imeout) timeout_ms] [\-V(ersion)] [\-h(elp)] [<lid | dr_path | guid>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
Display the lid (and range) as well as the GID address of the
port specified (by DR path, lid, or GUID) or the local port by default.
.PP
Note: this utility can be used as simple address resolver.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
\fB\-G\fR, \fB\-\-Guid\fR
show lid range and gid for GUID address
.TP
\fB\-l\fR, \fB\-\-lid_show\fR
show lid range only
.TP
\fB\-L\fR, \fB\-\-Lid_show\fR
show lid range (in decimal) only
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-gid_show\fR
show gid address only

.SH COMMON OPTIONS

Most OpenIB diagnostics take the following common flags. The exact list of
supported flags per utility can be found in the usage message and can be shown
using the util_name -h syntax.

# Debugging flags
.PP
\-d      raise the IB debugging level.
        May be used several times (-ddd or -d -d -d).
.PP
\-e      show send and receive errors (timeouts and others)
.PP
\-h      show the usage message
.PP
\-v      increase the application verbosity level.
        May be used several times (-vv or -v -v -v)
.PP
\-V      show the version info.

# Addressing flags
.PP
\-D      use directed path address arguments. The path
        is a comma separated list of out ports.
        Examples:
        "0"             # self port
        "0,1,2,1,4"     # out via port 1, then 2, ...
.PP
\-G      use GUID address argument. In most cases, it is the Port GUID.
        Example:
        "0x08f1040023"
.PP
\-s <smlid>      use 'smlid' as the target lid for SM/SA queries.

# Other common flags:
.PP
\-C <ca_name>    use the specified ca_name.
.PP
\-P <ca_port>    use the specified ca_port.
.PP
\-t <timeout_ms> override the default timeout for the solicited mads.

Multiple CA/Multiple Port Support

When no IB device or port is specified, the port to use is selected
by the following criteria:
.PP
1. the first port that is ACTIVE.
.PP
2. if not found, the first port that is UP (physical link up).

If a port and/or CA name is specified, the user request is
attempted to be fulfilled, and will fail if it is not possible.

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
ibaddr                  # local port\'s address
.PP
ibaddr 32               # show lid range and gid of lid 32
.PP
ibaddr -G 0x8f1040023   # same but using guid address
.PP
ibaddr -l 32            # show lid range only
.PP
ibaddr -L 32            # show decimal lid range only
.PP
ibaddr -g 32            # show gid address only

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ibroute (8),
.BR ibtracert (8)

.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Hal Rosenstock
.RI < halr@voltaire.com >
