.TH IBSYSSTAT 8 "August 11, 2006" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Diagnostics"

.SH NAME
ibsysstat \- system status on an InfiniBand address

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ibsysstat
[\-d(ebug)] [\-e(rr_show)] [\-v(erbose)] [\-G(uid)] [\-C ca_name] [\-P ca_port] [\-s smlid] [\-t(imeout) timeout_ms] [\-V(ersion)] [\-o oui] [\-S(erver)] [\-h(elp)] <dest lid | guid> [<op>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
ibsysstat uses vendor mads to validate connectivity between IB nodes
and obtain other information about the IB node. ibsysstat is run as
client/server. Default is to run as client.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
Current supported operations:
 ping \- verify connectivity to server (default)
 host \- obtain host information from server
 cpu  \- obtain cpu information from server
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-oui\fR
use specified OUI number to multiplex vendor mads
.TP
\fB\-S\fR, \fB\-\-Server\fR
start in server mode (do not return)


.SH COMMON OPTIONS

Most OpenIB diagnostics take the following common flags. The exact list of
supported flags per utility can be found in the usage message and can be shown
using the util_name -h syntax.

# Debugging flags
.PP
\-d      raise the IB debugging level.
        May be used several times (-ddd or -d -d -d).
.PP
\-e      show send and receive errors (timeouts and others)
.PP
\-h      show the usage message
.PP
\-v      increase the application verbosity level.
        May be used several times (-vv or -v -v -v)
.PP
\-V      show the version info.

# Addressing flags
.PP
\-G      use GUID address argument. In most cases, it is the Port GUID.
        Example:
        "0x08f1040023"
.PP
\-s <smlid>      use 'smlid' as the target lid for SM/SA queries.

# Other common flags:
.PP
\-C <ca_name>    use the specified ca_name.
.PP
\-P <ca_port>    use the specified ca_port.
.PP
\-t <timeout_ms> override the default timeout for the solicited mads.

Multiple CA/Multiple Port Support

When no IB device or port is specified, the port to use is selected
by the following criteria:
.PP
1. the first port that is ACTIVE.
.PP
2. if not found, the first port that is UP (physical link up).

If a port and/or CA name is specified, the user request is
attempted to be fulfilled, and will fail if it is not possible.

.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Hal Rosenstock
.RI < halr@voltaire.com >
