.TH SMPQUERY 8 "March 14, 2007" "OpenIB" "OpenIB Diagnostics"

.SH NAME
smpquery \- query InfiniBand subnet management attributes

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B smpquery
[\-d(ebug)] [\-e(rr_show)] [\-v(erbose)] [\-D(irect)] [\-G(uid)] [\-C ca_name] [\-P ca_port] [\-t(imeout) timeout_ms] [--node-name-map node-name-map] [\-V(ersion)] [\-h(elp)] <op> <dest dr_path|lid|guid> [op params]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
smpquery allows a basic subset of standard SMP queries including the following:
node info, node description, switch info, port info. Fields are displayed in
human readable format.

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.TP
Current supported operations and their parameters:
        nodeinfo <addr>
        nodedesc <addr>
        portinfo <addr> [<portnum>]     # default port is zero
        switchinfo <addr>
        pkeys <addr> [<portnum>]
        sl2vl <addr> [<portnum>]
        vlarb <addr> [<portnum>]
        guids <addr>

.TP
\fB\-\-node\-name\-map\fR <node-name-map>
Specify a node name map.  The node name map file maps GUIDs to more user friendly
names.  See
.B ibnetdiscover(8)
for node name map file format.

.SH COMMON OPTIONS

Most OpenIB diagnostics take the following common flags. The exact list of
supported flags per utility can be found in the usage message and can be shown
using the util_name -h syntax.

# Debugging flags
.PP
\-d      raise the IB debugging level.
        May be used several times (-ddd or -d -d -d).
.PP
\-e      show send and receive errors (timeouts and others)
.PP
\-h      show the usage message
.PP
\-v      increase the application verbosity level.
        May be used several times (-vv or -v -v -v)
.PP
\-V      show the version info.

# Addressing flags
.PP
\-D      use directed path address arguments. The path
        is a comma separated list of out ports.
        Examples:
        "0"             # self port
        "0,1,2,1,4"     # out via port 1, then 2, ...
.PP
\-c      use combined route address arguments. The
        address is a combination of a LID and a direct route path.
        The LID specified is the DLID and the local LID is used
        as the DrSLID.
.PP
\-G      use GUID address argument. In most cases, it is the Port GUID.
        Example:
        "0x08f1040023"
.PP
\-s <smlid>      use 'smlid' as the target lid for SM/SA queries.

# Other common flags:
.PP
\-C <ca_name>    use the specified ca_name.
.PP
\-P <ca_port>    use the specified ca_port.
.PP
\-t <timeout_ms> override the default timeout for the solicited mads.

Multiple CA/Multiple Port Support

When no IB device or port is specified, the port to use is selected
by the following criteria:
.PP
1. the first port that is ACTIVE.
.PP
2. if not found, the first port that is UP (physical link up).

If a port and/or CA name is specified, the user request is
attempted to be fulfilled, and will fail if it is not possible.

.SH EXAMPLES

.PP
smpquery portinfo 3 1        # portinfo by lid, with port modifier
.PP
smpquery -G switchinfo 0x2C9000100D051 1        # switchinfo by guid
.PP
smpquery -D nodeinfo 0       # nodeinfo by direct route
.PP
smpquery -c nodeinfo 6 0,12  # nodeinfo by combined route

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR smpdump (8)

.SH AUTHOR
.TP
Hal Rosenstock
.RI < halr@voltaire.com >
