.\"
.\" (c) Copyright 1995 Wolfram Schneider. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"    This product includes software developed by Wolfram Schneider
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" /usr/bin/makewhatis - create whatis database
.\"
.\"   Email: Wolfram Schneider <wosch@cs.tu-berlin.de>
.\"
.\" $Id: makewhatis.1,v 1.2 1995/03/31 04:00:51 joerg Exp $
.\"

.Dd Jan, 12, 1995
.Dt MAKEWHATIS 1
.Os FreeBSD 2.1
.Sh NAME
.Nm makewhatis
.Nd create whatis database

.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm makewhatis
.Op Fl i | Fl indent Ar column
.Op Fl n | Fl name Ar name
.Op Fl o | Fl outfile Ar file
.Op Fl v | Fl verbose
.Op Fl h | Fl help
.Op Ar directories ...

.Sh DESCRIPTION 
.Nm Makewhatis
extracts the name and a short description from unformatted manpages
and creates the
.Xr whatis 1
database. 
.Nm Makewhatis 
can read gzip'ed manpages.

.Ar Directory
names a directory containing manpage subdirectories
.Pq named Pa man[0-8] .
Colons are treated as spaces, hence
.Ic makewhatis $MANPATH
or
.Ic makewhatis `manpath`
are allowed.

.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl h , Fl help
Print options and exit.
.It Fl v, Fl verbose
Issue more warnings
.Pq to stderr .
For every parsed man page write a single char:
.Ql \&.
for an uncompressed page,
.Ql *
for a compressed page, and
.Ql +
for a link.

.It Fl i , Fl indent Ar column
Justify description strings to
.Ar column Pq default 24 .

.It Fl o , Fl outfile Ar file
Write all output to
.Ar file
instead of
.Pa dirname/whatis Ns .

.It Fl n , Fl name Ar name
Use
.Ar name
instead of
.Pa whatis Ns .

.Sh EXAMPLES
.Pp
.Ic makewhatis $MANPATH
.Pp
Create whatis database for all directories in your
.Pa $MANPATH Ns .
.Pp
.Ic makewhatis -outfile /tmp/mywhatis /usr/local/man $HOME/man
.Pp
Create whatis database 
.Pa /tmp/mywhatis
\&.
Traverse directories
.Pa /usr/local/man
and
.Pa $HOME/man Ns .
Don't create
.Pa /usr/local/man/whatis
or
.Pa $HOME/man/whatis Ns .
.Pp
.Ic makewhatis -name windex $HOME/man
.Pp
Create whatis database
.Pa windex
instead of
.Pa whatis Ns .
May be useful for Solaris.

.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /etc/master.passwdxx -compact
.It Pa */man/whatis
whatis database
.It Pa /etc/weekly
run
.Nm
every week
.El

.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr whatis 1 ,
.Xr apropos 1 ,
.Xr manpath 1 ,
.Xr catman 1 .

.Sh HISTORY
This
.Nm
command appeared in FreeBSD 2.1.

.Sh AUTHOR
Wolfram Schneider
.Aq wosch@cs.tu-berlin.de ,
Germany
