.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH ADDFTINFO @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
addftinfo \- add information to troff font files for use with groff
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B addftinfo
[
.BI \- param\ value\fR.\|.\|.
]
.I res
.I unitwidth
.I font
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B addftinfo
reads a troff font file
and adds some additional font-metric information
that is used by the groff system.
The font file with the information added is written on the
standard output.
The information added is guessed using 
some parametric information about the font
and assumptions
about the traditional troff names for characters.
The main information added is the heights and depths of characters.
The
.I res
and
.I unitwidth
arguments should be the same as the corresponding parameters
in the DESC file;
.I font
is the name of the file describing the font;
if
.I font
ends with
.B I
the font will be assumed to be italic.
.SH OPTIONS
Each of the options changes one of the parameters that is used
to derive the heights and depths.
Like the existing quantities in the font
file, each
.I value
is in
.RI inches/ res
for a font whose point size is
.IR unitwidth .
.I param
must be one of:
.TP
.B x-height
The height of lowercase letters without ascenders such as x.
.TP
.B fig-height
The height of figures (digits).
.TP
.B asc-height
The height of characters with ascenders, such as b, d or l.
.TP
.B body-height
The height of characters such as parentheses.
.TP
.B cap-height
The height of uppercase letters such as A.
.TP
.B comma-depth
The depth of a comma.
.TP
.B desc-depth
The depth of characters with descenders, such as p,q, or y.
.TP
.B body-depth
The depth of characters such as parentheses.
.LP
.B addftinfo
makes no attempt to use the specified parameters to guess
the unspecified parameters.
If a parameter is not specified the default will be used.
The defaults are chosen to have the reasonable values for
a Times font.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff_char (@MAN7EXT@)
