contrib/unbound/README.md, before:

# Unbound

[![Travis Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/NLnetLabs/unbound.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/NLnetLabs/unbound)
[![Packaging status](https://repology.org/badge/tiny-repos/unbound.svg)](https://repology.org/project/unbound/versions)
[![Fuzzing Status](https://oss-fuzz-build-logs.storage.googleapis.com/badges/unbound.svg)](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/oss-fuzz/issues/list?sort=-opened&can=1&q=proj:unbound)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/unbound/badge/?version=latest)](https://unbound.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
[![Mastodon Follow](https://img.shields.io/mastodon/follow/109262826617293067?domain=https%3A%2F%2Ffosstodon.org&style=social)](https://fosstodon.org/@nlnetlabs)

Unbound is a validating, recursive, caching DNS resolver. It is designed to be
fast and lean and incorporates modern features based on open standards. If you
have any feedback, we would love to hear from you. Don’t hesitate to
[create an issue on Github](https://github.com/NLnetLabs/unbound/issues/new)
or post a message on the [Unbound mailing list](https://lists.nlnetlabs.nl/mailman/listinfo/unbound-users).
You can learn more about Unbound by reading our
[documentation](https://unbound.docs.nlnetlabs.nl/).

## Compiling

Make sure you have the C toolchain, OpenSSL and its include files, and libexpat
installed. Unbound can be compiled and installed using:

```
./configure && make && make install
```

You can use libevent if you want. libevent is useful when using many (10000)
outgoing ports. By default max 256 ports are opened at the same time and the
builtin alternative is equally capable and a little faster.

Use the `--with-libevent=dir` configure option to compile Unbound with libevent
support.

## Unbound configuration

All of Unbound's configuration options are described in the man pages, which
will be installed and are available on the Unbound
[documentation page](https://unbound.docs.nlnetlabs.nl/).

An example configuration file is located in
[doc/example.conf](https://github.com/NLnetLabs/unbound/blob/master/doc/example.conf.in).

Commit message:

unbound: Vendor import 1.19.1
Release notes at
    https://www.nlnetlabs.nl/news/2024/Feb/13/unbound-1.19.1-released/

Security:	CVE-2023-50387, CVE-2023-50868
Security:	FreeBSD-SA-24:03.unbound
Approved by:    so

(cherry picked from commit 8f76bb7dad48538c6832c2fb466a433d2a3f8cd5)
(cherry picked from commit 4f4adb0576dfbcd0d956db0146c9de7e1bb71563)
(cherry picked from commit 948e11aaf420cd7d493cc2e118cacc06d18653fe)
(cherry picked from commit f5a091c1f6a068cdc5c3bd23536830de9dfe7b84)
(cherry picked from commit 6e71235e558ef579605e7f35b02f983b9a246a4a)
(cherry picked from commit 64ac3bca3a6ec8510ae7175cbdd73aa594756e2a)
(cherry picked from commit 103ba509e72e3949d22485666949e9705d4af8cd)
(cherry picked from commit 2bdab519a5c9822571d005c62adec484cf65c2e7)
(cherry picked from commit 5aab39b24ce7437265b94461ffdd9b12c0723658)
(cherry picked from commit a077e95570d9cef9882be688dc28303b6257cfd0)
(cherry picked from commit 67267734315c6a48db31697f0a0669fa1f985969)
(cherry picked from commit 17b51a12dca08f5126600e11181cee9454884e02)
(cherry picked from commit b76ef9a7cb8a7c62d10ae8101f41014f34819174)
(cherry picked from commit abe4ced2b9de0a3dd44d7e2068cfd7fa2b428c16)

contrib/unbound/README.md, after:

# Unbound

[![Github Build Status](https://github.com/NLnetLabs/unbound/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://github.com/NLnetLabs/unbound/actions)
[![Packaging status](https://repology.org/badge/tiny-repos/unbound.svg)](https://repology.org/project/unbound/versions)
[![Fuzzing Status](https://oss-fuzz-build-logs.storage.googleapis.com/badges/unbound.svg)](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/oss-fuzz/issues/list?sort=-opened&can=1&q=proj:unbound)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/unbound/badge/?version=latest)](https://unbound.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
[![Mastodon Follow](https://img.shields.io/mastodon/follow/109262826617293067?domain=https%3A%2F%2Ffosstodon.org&style=social)](https://fosstodon.org/@nlnetlabs)

Unbound is a validating, recursive, caching DNS resolver. It is designed to be
fast and lean and incorporates modern features based on open standards. If you
have any feedback, we would love to hear from you. Don’t hesitate to
[create an issue on Github](https://github.com/NLnetLabs/unbound/issues/new)
or post a message on the [Unbound mailing list](https://lists.nlnetlabs.nl/mailman/listinfo/unbound-users).
You can learn more about Unbound by reading our
[documentation](https://unbound.docs.nlnetlabs.nl/).

## Compiling

Make sure you have the C toolchain, OpenSSL and its include files, and libexpat
installed.
If building from the repository source you also need flex and bison installed.
Unbound can be compiled and installed using:

```
./configure && make && make install
```

You can use libevent if you want. libevent is useful when using many (10000)
outgoing ports. By default max 256 ports are opened at the same time and the
builtin alternative is equally capable and a little faster.

Use the `--with-libevent` configure option to compile Unbound with libevent
support.

## Unbound configuration

All of Unbound's configuration options are described in the man pages, which
will be installed and are available on the Unbound
[documentation page](https://unbound.docs.nlnetlabs.nl/).

An example configuration file is located in
[doc/example.conf](https://github.com/NLnetLabs/unbound/blob/master/doc/example.conf.in).
