.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 1, 2007
.Dt VHOLD 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vhold , vdrop , vdropl
.Nd "acquire/release a hold on a vnode"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft void
.Fn vhold "struct vnode *vp"
.Ft void
.Fn vdrop "struct vnode *vp"
.Ft void
.Fn vdropl "struct vnode *vp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vhold
function increments the
.Va v_holdcnt
of the given vnode.
If the vnode has already been added to the free list and is still referenced,
it will be removed.
.Pp
The
.Fn vdrop
and
.Fn vdropl
functions decrement the
.Va v_holdcnt
of the vnode.
If the holdcount is less than or equal to zero prior to calling
.Fn vdrop
or
.Fn vdropl ,
the system will panic.
If the vnode is no longer referenced, it will be freed.
.Pp
The difference between
.Fn vdrop
and
.Fn vdropl
is that
.Fn vdrop
locks the vnode interlock and then calls
.Fn vdropl
while
.Fn vdropl
expects the interlock to already be locked.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vbusy 9 ,
.Xr vfree 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq davidc@acns.ab.ca .
