=head1 NAME

perlintern - autogenerated documentation of purely B<internal> 
		 Perl functions

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This file is the autogenerated documentation of functions in the 
Perl interpreter that are documented using Perl's internal documentation
format but are not marked as part of the Perl API. In other words, 
B<they are not for use in extensions>!

=over 8

=item is_gv_magical

Returns C<TRUE> if given the name of a magical GV.

Currently only useful internally when determining if a GV should be
created even in rvalue contexts.

C<flags> is not used at present but available for future extension to
allow selecting particular classes of magical variable.

	bool	is_gv_magical(char *name, STRLEN len, U32 flags)

=for hackers
Found in file gv.c

=item LVRET

True if this op will be the return value of an lvalue subroutine

=for hackers
Found in file pp.h

=item PL_DBsingle

When Perl is run in debugging mode, with the B<-d> switch, this SV is a
boolean which indicates whether subs are being single-stepped. 
Single-stepping is automatically turned on after every step.  This is the C
variable which corresponds to Perl's $DB::single variable.  See
C<PL_DBsub>.

	SV *	PL_DBsingle

=for hackers
Found in file intrpvar.h

=item PL_DBsub

When Perl is run in debugging mode, with the B<-d> switch, this GV contains
the SV which holds the name of the sub being debugged.  This is the C
variable which corresponds to Perl's $DB::sub variable.  See
C<PL_DBsingle>.

	GV *	PL_DBsub

=for hackers
Found in file intrpvar.h

=item PL_DBtrace

Trace variable used when Perl is run in debugging mode, with the B<-d>
switch.  This is the C variable which corresponds to Perl's $DB::trace
variable.  See C<PL_DBsingle>.

	SV *	PL_DBtrace

=for hackers
Found in file intrpvar.h

=item PL_dowarn

The C variable which corresponds to Perl's $^W warning variable.

	bool	PL_dowarn

=for hackers
Found in file intrpvar.h

=item PL_last_in_gv

The GV which was last used for a filehandle input operation. (C<< <FH> >>)

	GV*	PL_last_in_gv

=for hackers
Found in file thrdvar.h

=item PL_ofs_sv

The output field separator - C<$,> in Perl space.

	SV*	PL_ofs_sv

=for hackers
Found in file thrdvar.h

=item PL_rs

The input record separator - C<$/> in Perl space.

	SV*	PL_rs

=for hackers
Found in file thrdvar.h

=back

=head1 AUTHORS

The autodocumentation system was originally added to the Perl core by 
Benjamin Stuhl. Documentation is by whoever was kind enough to 
document their functions.

=head1 SEE ALSO

perlguts(1), perlapi(1)

