.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Felix Johnson <felix.the.red@gmail.com>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
.\" PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 12, 2021
.Dt PTHREAD_NP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pthread_np
.Nd FreeBSD extensions to POSIX thread functions
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpthread
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In pthread_np.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents extensions to the POSIX thread functions.
These extensions may or may not be portable to other operating systems.
.Pp
The POSIX thread functions are summarized in this section in the following
groups:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
Thread Routines
.It
Attribute Object Routines
.It
Mutex Routines
.El
.\" .It
.\" Condition Variable Routines
.\" .It
.\" Read/Write Lock Routines
.\" .It
.\" Per-Thread Context Routines
.\" .It
.\" Cleanup Routines
.Ss Thread Routines
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fo pthread_getaffinity_np
.Fa "pthread_t td" "size_t cpusetsize" "cpuset_t *cpusetp"
.Fc
.Xc
Get the CPU affinity of a specified thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_get_name_np "pthread_t thread" "char *name" "size_t len"
.Xc
Get the name of a specified thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_getname_np "pthread_t thread" "char *name" "size_t len"
.Xc
Get the name of a specified thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_getthreadid_np void
.Xc
Get the calling thread's integral ID.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_main_np void
.Xc
Identify the initial thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_multi_np void
.Xc
Sets the thread's scheduling mode to multi-threaded.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_peekjoin_np "pthread_t thread" "void **value_ptr"
.Xc
Peek into the exit status of a specified thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_resume_all_np void
.Xc
Resume all suspended threads.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fo pthread_setaffinity_np
.Fa "pthread_t td" "size_t cpusetsize" "const cpuset_t *cpusetp"
.Fc
.Xc
Set the CPU affinity of a specified thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_set_name_np "pthread_t thread" "char *name"
.Xc
Sets the specified thread's name.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_setname_np "pthread_t thread" "char *name"
.Xc
Sets the specified thread's name.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_single_np void
.Xc
Sets the thread's scheduling mode to single-threaded.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_suspend_np "pthread_t tid"
.Xc
Suspend the specified thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_suspend_all_np void
.Xc
Suspend all active threads.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_switch_add_np "pthread_switch_routine_t routine"
.Xc
Install a routine that is called every time a thread context switches.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_switch_delete_np "pthread_switch_routine_t routine"
.Xc
Remove a routine that is called every time a thread context switches.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fo pthread_timedjoin_np
.Fa "pthread_t thread" "void **value_ptr" "const struct timespec *abstime"
.Fc
.Xc
A variant of
.Fn pthread_join
with a timeout.
.El
.Ss Attribute Object Routines
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fo pthread_attr_get_np
.Fa "pthread_t pid" "pthread_attr_t *dst"
.Fc
.Xc
Get the attributes of an existent thread.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fo pthread_attr_getaffinity_np
.Fa "const pthread_attr_t *pattr" "size_t cpusetsize" "cpuset_t *cpusetp"
.Fc
.Xc
Get the CPU affinity mask from the thread attribute object.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fo pthread_attr_setaffinity_np
.Fa "pthread_attr_t *pattr" "size_t cpusetsize" "const cpuset_t *cpusetp"
.Fc
.Xc
Set the CPU affinity mask for the thread attribute object.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_attr_setcreatesuspend_np "pthread_attr_t *attr"
.Xc
Permit creation of suspended threads.
.El
.Ss Mutex Routines
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_mutexattr_getkind_np "pthread_mutexattr_t attr"
.Xc
Deprecated, use
.Xr pthread_mutexattr_gettype 3
instead.
.It Xo
.Ft int
.Fn pthread_mutexattr_setkind_np "pthread_mutexattr_t *attr"
.Xc
Deprecated, use
.Xr pthread_mutexattr_settype 3
instead.
.El
.\" .Ss Condition Variable Routines
.\" .Bl -tag -width indent
.\" .El
.\" .Ss Read/Write Lock Routines
.\" .Bl -tag -width indent
.\" .El
.\" .Ss Per-Thread Context Routines
.\" .Bl -tag -width indent
.\" .El
.\" .Ss Cleanup Routines
.\" .Bl -tag -width indent
.\" .El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr libthr 3 ,
.Xr pthread 3 ,
.Xr pthread_affinity_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_affinity_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_get_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_attr_setcreatesuspend_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_getthreadid_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_join 3 ,
.Xr pthread_main_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_multi_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_mutexattr_getkind_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_resume_all_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_resume_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_set_name_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_suspend_all_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_suspend_np 3 ,
.Xr pthread_switch_add_np 3
.Sh STANDARDS
All of these functions are non-portable extensions to POSIX threads.
