.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018 Netflix, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification, immediately at the beginning of the file.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd July 8, 2018
.Dt Q_SIGNSHFT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm Q_SIGNSHFT ,
.Nm Q_SSIGN ,
.Nm Q_CRAWMASK ,
.Nm Q_SRAWMASK ,
.Nm Q_GCRAW ,
.Nm Q_GCVAL ,
.Nm Q_SCVAL
.Nd fixed-point math functions which manipulate the control/sign data bits
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/qmath.h
.Ft uint32_t
.Fn Q_SIGNSHFT "QTYPE q"
.Ft QTYPE
.Fn Q_SSIGN "QTYPE q" "bool isneg"
.Ft ITYPE
.Fn Q_CRAWMASK "QTYPE q"
.Ft ITYPE
.Fn Q_SRAWMASK "QTYPE q"
.Ft ITYPE
.Fn Q_GCRAW "QTYPE q"
.Ft ITYPE
.Fn Q_GCVAL "QTYPE q"
.Ft QTYPE
.Fn Q_SCVAL "QTYPE q" "ITYPE cv"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn Q_SIGNSHFT
gets the bit position of
.Fa q Ap s
sign bit relative to bit zero.
.Pp
.Fn Q_SSIGN
sets the sign bit of
.Fa q
based on the boolean
.Fa isneg .
.Pp
.Fn Q_CRAWMASK
and
.Fn Q_SRAWMASK
return
.Fa q Ns -specific
bit masks for
.Fa q Ap s
control bits and sign bit respectively.
.Pp
.Fn Q_GCRAW
and
.Fn Q_GCVAL
get the raw masked control bits and value of
.Fa q Ap s
control bits respectively.
.Pp
.Fn Q_SCVAL
sets
.Fa q Ap s
control bits to the value
.Fa cv .
.Pp
All of those functions operate on
the following data types:
.Vt s8q_t ,
.Vt u8q_t ,
.Vt s16q_t ,
.Vt u16q_t ,
.Vt s32q_t ,
.Vt u32q_t ,
.Vt s64q_t ,
and
.Vt u64q_t ,
which are referred to generically as
.Fa QTYPE .
The
.Fa ITYPE
refers to the
.Xr stdint 7
integer types.
.Pp
For more details, see
.Xr qmath 3 .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn Q_SIGNSHFT
returns the sign bit's position as an integer.
.Pp
.Fn Q_SSIGN
returns the value of
.Fa q
post change.
.Pp
.Fn Q_CRAWMASK ,
.Fn Q_SRAWMASK ,
.Fn Q_GCRAW
and
.Fn Q_GCVAL
return their respective values as integers of the same underlying ITYPE as
.Fa q .
.Pp
.Fn Q_SCVAL
returns the value of
.Fa q
post change.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr errno 2 ,
.Xr qmath 3 ,
.Xr stdint 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Xr qmath 3
functions first appeared in
.Fx 13.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Xr qmath 3
functions and this manual page were written by
.An Lawrence Stewart Aq Mt lstewart@FreeBSD.org
and sponsored by Netflix, Inc.
