.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2022 Alexander Chernikov <melifaro@FreeBSD.org>.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd December 16, 2022
.Dt SNL 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snl_init ,
.Nm snl_free ,
.Nm snl_read_message ,
.Nm snl_send ,
.Nm snl_get_seq ,
.Nm snl_allocz ,
.Nm snl_clear_lb ,
.Nm snl_parse_nlmsg ,
.Nm snl_parse_header ,
.Nm snl_parse_attrs ,
.Nm snl_parse_attrs_raw ,
.Nm snl_attr_get_flag ,
.Nm snl_attr_get_ip ,
.Nm snl_attr_get_uint16 ,
.Nm snl_attr_get_uint32 ,
.Nm snl_attr_get_string ,
.Nm snl_attr_get_stringn ,
.Nm snl_attr_get_nla ,
.Nm snl_field_get_uint8 ,
.Nm snl_field_get_uint16 ,
.Nm snl_field_get_uint32
.Nd "simple netlink library"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netlink/netlink_snl.h
.In netlink/netlink_snl_route.h
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_init "struct snl_state *ss" "int netlink_family"
.Fn snl_free "struct snl_state *ss"
.Ft "struct nlmsghdr *"
.Fn snl_read_message "struct snl_state *ss"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_send "struct snl_state *ss" "void *data" "int sz"
.Ft "uint32_t"
.Fn snl_get_seq "struct snl_state *ss"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn snl_allocz "struct snl_state *ss" "int len"
.Fn snl_clear_lb "struct snl_state *ss"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_parse_nlmsg "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlmsghdr *hdr" "const struct snl_hdr_parser *ps" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_parse_header "struct snl_state *ss" "void *hdr" "int len" "const struct snl_hdr_parser *ps" "int pslen" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_parse_attrs "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlmsghdr *hdr" "int hdrlen" "const struct snl_attr_parser *ps" "int pslen" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_parse_attrs_raw "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla_head" "int len" "const struct snl_attr_parser *ps" "int pslen" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_flag "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_uint16 "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_uint32 "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_string "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_stringn "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_nla "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_ip "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_ipvia "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "void *target"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Xr snl 3
library provides an easy way of sending and receiving Netlink messages,
taking care of serialisation and deserialisation.
.Ss INITIALISATION
Call
.Fn snl_init
with a pointer to the
.Dv struct snl_state
and the desired Netlink family to initialise the library instance.
To free the library instance, call
.Fn snl_free .
.Pp
The library functions are NOT multithread-safe.
If multithreading is desired, consider initializing an instance
per thread.
.Ss MEMORY ALLOCATION
The library uses pre-allocated extendable memory buffers to handle message parsing.
The typical usage pattern is to allocate the necessary data structures during the
message parsing or writing process via
.Fn snl_allocz
and free all allocated data at once using
.Fn snl_clear_lb
after handling the message.
.Ss COMPOSING AND SENDING MESSAGES
The library does not currently offer any wrappers for writing netlink messages.
Simple request messages can be composed by filling in all needed fields directly.
Example for constructing an interface dump request:
.Bd -literal
	struct {
		struct nlmsghdr hdr;
		struct ifinfomsg ifmsg;
	} msg = {
		.hdr.nlmsg_type = RTM_GETLINK,
		.hdr.nlmsg_flags = NLM_F_DUMP | NLM_F_REQUEST,
		.hdr.nlmsg_seq = snl_get_seq(ss),
	};
	msg.hdr.nlmsg_len = sizeof(msg);
.Ed
.Fn snl_get_seq
can be used to generate a unique message number.
To send the resulting message,
.Fn snl_send
can be used.
.Ss RECEIVING AND PARSING MESSAGES
To receive a message, use
.Fn snl_read_message .
Currently, this call is blocking.
.Pp
The library provides an easy way to convert the message to the pre-defined C
structure.
For each message type, one needs to define rules, converting the protocol header
fields and the desired attributes to the specified structure.
It can be accomplished by using message parsers.
Each message parser consists of an array of attribute getters and an array of
header field getters.
The former array needs to be sorted by the attribute type.
There is a
.Fn SNL_VERIFY_PARSERS
macro to check if the order is correct.
.Fn SNL_DECLARE_PARSER "parser_name" "family header type" "struct snl_field_parser[]" "struct snl_attr_parser[]"
can be used to create a new parser.
.Fn SNL_DECLARE_ATTR_PARSER "parser_name" "struct snl_field_parser[]"
can be used to create an attribute-only message parser.
.Pp
Each attribute getter needs to be embedded in the following structure:
.Bd -literal
typedef bool snl_parse_attr_f(struct snl_state *ss, struct nlattr *attr, const void *arg, void *target);
struct snl_attr_parser {
	uint16_t		type;	/* Attribute type */
	uint16_t		off;	/* field offset in the target structure */
	snl_parse_attr_f	*cb;	/* getter function to call */
	const void		*arg;	/* getter function custom argument */
};
.Ed
The generic attribute getter has the following signature:
.Ft "bool"
.Fn snl_attr_get_<type> "struct snl_state *ss" "struct nlattr *nla" "const void *arg" "void *target" .
nla contains the pointer of the attribute to use as the datasource.
The target field is the pointer to the field in the target structure.
It is up to the getter to know the type of the target field.
The getter must check the input attribute and return
false if the attribute is not formed correctly.
Otherwise, the getter fetches the attribute value and stores it in the target,
then returns true.
It is possible to use
.Fn snl_allocz
to create the desired data structure .
A number of predefined getters for the common data types exist.
.Fn snl_attr_get_flag
converts a flag-type attribute to an uint8_t value of 1 or 0, depending on the
attribute presence.
.Fn snl_attr_get_uint16
stores a uint16_t type attribute into the uint16_t target field.
.Fn snl_attr_get_uint32
stores a uint32_t type attribute into the uint32_t target field.
.Fn snl_attr_get_ip
and
.Fn snl_attr_get_ipvia
stores a pointer to the sockaddr structure with the IPv4/IPv6 address contained
in the attribute.
Sockaddr is allocated using
.Fn snl_allocz .
.Fn snl_attr_get_string
stores a pointer to the NULL-terminated string.
The string itself is allocated using
.Fn snl_allocz .
.Fn snl_attr_get_nla
stores a pointer to the specified attribute.
.Fn snl_attr_get_stringn
stores a pointer to the non-NULL-terminated string.
.Pp
Similarly, each family header getter needs to be embedded in the following structure:
.Bd -literal
typedef void snl_parse_field_f(struct snl_state *ss, void *hdr, void *target);
struct snl_field_parser {
	uint16_t		off_in;	/* field offset in the input structure */
	uint16_t                off_out;/* field offset in the target structure */
	snl_parse_field_f       *cb;	/* getter function to call */
};
.Ed
The generic field getter has the following signature:
.Ft "void"
snl_field_get_<type> "struct snl_state *ss" "void *src" "void *target" .
A number of pre-defined getters for the common data types exist.
.Fn "snl_field_get_uint8"
fetches an uint8_t value and stores it in the target.
.Fn "snl_field_get_uint16"
fetches an uint8_t value and stores it in the target.
.Fn "snl_field_get_uint32"
fetches an uint32_t value and stores it in the target.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example demonstrates how to list all system interfaces
using netlink.
.Bd -literal
#include <stdio.h>

#include <netlink/netlink.h>
#include <netlink/netlink_route.h>
#include "netlink/netlink_snl.h"
#include "netlink/netlink_snl_route.h"

struct nl_parsed_link {
	uint32_t		ifi_index;
	uint32_t		ifla_mtu;
	char			*ifla_ifname;
};

#define	_IN(_field)	offsetof(struct ifinfomsg, _field)
#define	_OUT(_field)	offsetof(struct nl_parsed_link, _field)
static const struct snl_attr_parser ap_link[] = {
	{ .type = IFLA_IFNAME, .off = _OUT(ifla_ifname), .cb = snl_attr_get_string },
	{ .type = IFLA_MTU, .off = _OUT(ifla_mtu), .cb = snl_attr_get_uint32 },
};
static const struct snl_field_parser fp_link[] = {
	{.off_in = _IN(ifi_index), .off_out = _OUT(ifi_index), .cb = snl_field_get_uint32 },
};
#undef _IN
#undef _OUT
SNL_DECLARE_PARSER(link_parser, struct ifinfomsg, fp_link, ap_link);


int
main(int ac, char *argv[])
{
	struct snl_state ss;

	if (!snl_init(&ss, NETLINK_ROUTE))
		return (1);

	struct {
		struct nlmsghdr hdr;
		struct ifinfomsg ifmsg;
	} msg = {
		.hdr.nlmsg_type = RTM_GETLINK,
		.hdr.nlmsg_flags = NLM_F_DUMP | NLM_F_REQUEST,
		.hdr.nlmsg_seq = snl_get_seq(&ss),
	};
	msg.hdr.nlmsg_len = sizeof(msg);

	if (!snl_send(&ss, &msg, sizeof(msg))) {
		snl_free(&ss);
		return (1);
	}

	struct nlmsghdr *hdr;
	while ((hdr = snl_read_message(&ss)) != NULL && hdr->nlmsg_type != NLMSG_DONE) {
		if (hdr->nlmsg_seq != msg.hdr.nlmsg_seq)
			break;

		struct nl_parsed_link link = {};
		if (!snl_parse_nlmsg(&ss, hdr, &link_parser, &link))
			continue;
		printf("Link#%u %s mtu %u\n", link.ifi_index, link.ifla_ifname, link.ifla_mtu);
	}

	return (0);
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr genetlink 4 ,
.Xr netlink 4 ,
and
.Xr rtnetlink 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Dv SNL
library appeared in
.Fx 13.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This library was implemented by
.An Alexander Chernikov Aq Mt melifaro@FreeBSD.org .
