.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2016-2018 Netflix, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification, immediately at the beginning of the file.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 7, 2019
.Dt STATS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm stats
.Nd statistics gathering
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libstats
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/arb.h
.In sys/qmath.h
.In sys/stats.h
.Ss Stats Blob Template Management Functions
.Ft int
.Fo stats_tpl_alloc
.Fa "const char *name"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_tpl_fetch_allocid
.Fa "const char *name"
.Fa "uint32_t hash"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_tpl_fetch
.Fa "int tpl_id"
.Fa "struct statsblob_tpl **tpl"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_tpl_id2name
.Fa "uint32_t tpl_id"
.Fa "char *buf"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_tpl_sample_rates
.Fa "SYSCTL_HANDLER_ARGS"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_tpl_sample_rollthedice
.Fa "struct stats_tpl_sample_rate *rates"
.Fa "int nrates"
.Fa "void *seed_bytes"
.Fa "size_t seed_len"
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo STATS_VSS_SUM
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo STATS_VSS_MAX
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo STATS_VSS_MIN
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo STATS_VSS_CRHIST<32|64>_LIN
.Fa "lb"
.Fa "ub"
.Fa "stepinc"
.Fa "vsdflags"
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo STATS_VSS_CRHIST<32|64>_EXP
.Fa "lb"
.Fa "ub"
.Fa "stepbase"
.Fa "stepexp"
.Fa "vsdflags"
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo "STATS_VSS_CRHIST<32|64>_LINEXP"
.Fa "lb"
.Fa "ub"
.Fa "nlinsteps"
.Fa "stepbase"
.Fa "vsdflags"
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo "STATS_VSS_CRHIST<32|64>_USR"
.Fa Sy "HBKTS" Ns Pq Sy "CRBKT" Ns ( Em "lb" ) , "..." Pc ,
.Fa "vsdflags"
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo "STATS_VSS_DRHIST<32|64>_USR"
.Fa Sy "HBKTS" Ns Pq Sy "DRBKT" Ns ( Em "lb" , "ub" ) , "..." Pc ,
.Fa "vsdflags"
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo "STATS_VSS_DVHIST<32|64>_USR"
.Fa Sy "HBKTS" Ns Pq Sy "DVBKT" Ns ( Em "val" ) , "..." Pc ,
.Fa "vsdflags"
.Fc
.Ft struct voistatspec
.Fo STATS_VSS_TDGSTCLUST<32|64>
.Fa "nctroids"
.Fa "prec"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_tpl_add_voistats
.Fa "uint32_t tpl_id"
.Fa "int32_t voi_id"
.Fa "const char *voi_name"
.Fa "enum vsd_dtype voi_dtype"
.Fa "uint32_t nvss"
.Fa "struct voistatspec *vss"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fc
.Ss Stats Blob Data Gathering Functions
.Ft int
.Fo stats_voi_update_<abs|rel>_<dtype>
.Fa "struct statsblob *sb"
.Fa "int32_t voi_id"
.Fa "<dtype> voival"
.Fc
.Ss Stats Blob Utility Functions
.Ft struct statsblob *
.Fo stats_blob_alloc
.Fa "uint32_t tpl_id"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_blob_init
.Fa "struct statsblob *sb"
.Fa "uint32_t tpl_id"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_blob_clone
.Fa "struct statsblob **dst"
.Fa "size_t dstmaxsz"
.Fa "struct statsblob *src"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo stats_blob_destroy
.Fa "struct statsblob *sb"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_voistat_fetch_dptr
.Fa "struct statsblob *sb"
.Fa "int32_t voi_id"
.Fa "enum voi_stype stype"
.Fa "enum vsd_dtype *retdtype"
.Fa "struct voistatdata **retvsd"
.Fa "size_t *retvsdsz"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_voistat_fetch_<dtype>
.Fa "struct statsblob *sb"
.Fa "int32_t voi_id"
.Fa "enum voi_stype stype"
.Fa "<dtype> *ret"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_blob_snapshot
.Fa "struct statsblob **dst"
.Fa "size_t dstmaxsz"
.Fa "struct statsblob *src"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_blob_tostr
.Fa "struct statsblob *sb"
.Fa "struct sbuf *buf"
.Fa "enum sb_str_fmt fmt"
.Fa "uint32_t flags"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo stats_voistatdata_tostr
.Fa "const struct voistatdata *vsd"
.Fa "enum vsd_dtype dtype"
.Fa "enum sb_str_fmt fmt"
.Fa "struct sbuf *buf"
.Fa "int objdump"
.Fc
.Ft typedef int
.Fn "\*(lp*stats_blob_visitcb_t\*(rp" "struct sb_visit *sbv" "void *usrctx"
.Ft int
.Fo stats_blob_visit
.Fa "struct statsblob *sb"
.Fa "stats_blob_visitcb_t func"
.Fa "void *usrctx"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
framework facilitates real-time kernel and user space statistics gathering.
The framework is built around the
.Dq statsblob ,
an object embedded within a contiguous memory allocation that is mostly opaque
to consumers and stores all required state.
A
.Dq statsblob
object can itself be embedded within other objects either directly or indirectly
using a pointer.
.Pp
Objects or subsystems for which statistics are to be gathered are initialized
from a template
.Dq statsblob ,
which acts as the blueprint for an arbitrary set of
Variables Of Interest (VOIs) and their associated statistics.
Each template defines a schema plus associated metadata, which are kept separate
to minimize the memory footprint of blobs.
.Pp
Data gathering hook functions added at appropriate locations within the code
base of interest feed VOI data into the framework for processing.
.Pp
Each
.Dq statsblob ,
consists of a
.Vt struct statsblob
header and opaque internal blob structure per the following diagram:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
---------------------------------------------------------
|   struct  |		       uint8_t			|
| statsblob |		      opaque[]			|
---------------------------------------------------------
.Ed
.Pp
The publicly visible 8-byte header is defined as:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct statsblob {
	uint8_t		abi;
	uint8_t		endian;
	uint16_t	flags;
	uint16_t	maxsz;
	uint16_t	cursz;
	uint8_t		opaque[];
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Va abi
specifies which API version the blob's
.Va opaque
internals conform to
.Pq Dv STATS_ABI_V1 is the only version currently defined .
.Va endian
specifies the endianness of the blob's fields
.Po
.Dv SB_LE
for little endian,
.Dv SB_BE
for big endian, or
.Dv SB_UE
for unknown endianness
.Pc .
.Va cursz
specifies the size of the blob, while
.Va maxsz
specifies the size of the underlying memory allocation in which the
blob is embedded.
Both
.Va cursz
and
.Va maxsz
default to units of bytes, unless a flag is set in
.Va flags
that dictates otherwise.
.Pp
Templates are constructed by associating arbitrary VOI IDs with a set of
statistics, where each statistic is specified using a
.Vt struct voistatspec
per the definition below:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct voistatspec {
	vss_hlpr_fn		hlpr;
	struct vss_hlpr_info	*hlprinfo;
	struct voistatdata	*iv;
	size_t			vsdsz;
	uint32_t		flags;
	enum vsd_dtype		vs_dtype : 8;
	enum voi_stype		stype : 8;
};
.Ed
.Pp
It is generally expected that consumers will not work with
.Vt struct voistatspec
directly, and instead use the
.Fn STATS_VSS_*
helper macros.
.Pp
The
.Nm
framework offers the following statistics for association with VOIs:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv VS_STYPE_TDGST"
.It Dv VS_STYPE_SUM
The sum of VOI values.
.It Dv VS_STYPE_MAX
The maximum VOI value.
.It Dv VS_STYPE_MIN
The minimum VOI value.
.It Dv VS_STYPE_HIST
A static bucket histogram of VOI values, including a count of
.Dq out-of-band/bucket Dc
values which did not match any bucket.
Histograms can be specified as
.Dq Em C Ns ontinuous Em R Ns ange Dc
.Pq CRHIST Pc ,
.Dq Em D Ns iscrete Em R Ns ange Dc
.Pq DRHIST Pc
or
.Dq Em D Ns iscrete Em V Ns alue Dc
.Pq DVHIST Pc ,
with 32 or 64 bit bucket counters, depending on the VOI semantics.
.It Dv VS_STYPE_TDGST
A dynamic bucket histogram of VOI values based on the t-digest method
.Po refer to the t-digest paper in the
.Sx SEE ALSO
section below
.Pc .
.El
.Pp
A
.Dq visitor software design pattern Ns
-like scheme is employed to facilitate iterating over a blob's data without
concern for the blob's structure.
The data provided to visitor callback functions is encapsulated in
.Vt struct sb_visit
per the definition below:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct sb_visit {
	struct voistatdata	*vs_data;
	uint32_t		tplhash;
	uint32_t		flags;
	int16_t			voi_id;
	int16_t			vs_dsz;
	enum vsd_dtype		voi_dtype : 8;
	enum vsd_dtype		vs_dtype : 8;
	int8_t			vs_stype;
	uint16_t		vs_errs;
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rates
and
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rollthedice
functions utilize
.Vt struct stats_tpl_sample_rate
to encapsulate per-template sample rate information per the definition below:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct stats_tpl_sample_rate {
	int32_t		tpl_slot_id;
	uint32_t	tpl_sample_pct;
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va tpl_slot_id
member holds the template's slot ID obtained from
.Fn stats_tpl_alloc
or
.Fn stats_tpl_fetch_allocid .
The
.Va tpl_sample_pct
member holds the template's sample rate as an integer percentage in the range
[0,100].
.Pp
The
.Vt stats_tpl_sr_cb_t
conformant function pointer that is required as the
.Fa arg1
of
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rates
is defined as:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
enum stats_tpl_sr_cb_action {
	TPL_SR_UNLOCKED_GET,
	TPL_SR_RLOCKED_GET,
	TPL_SR_RUNLOCK,
	TPL_SR_PUT
};
typedef int (*stats_tpl_sr_cb_t)(enum stats_tpl_sr_cb_action action,
    struct stats_tpl_sample_rate **rates, int *nrates, void *ctx);
.Ed
.Pp
It is required that a conformant function:
.Bl -dash
.It
Return an appropriate
.Xr errno 2
on error, otherwise 0.
.It
When called with
.Qq action == TPL_SR_*_GET ,
return the subsystem's rates list ptr and count, locked or unlocked as
requested.
.It
When called with
.Qq action == TPL_SR_RUNLOCK ,
unlock the subsystem's rates list ptr and count.
Pair with a prior
.Qq action == TPL_SR_RLOCKED_GET
call.
.It
When called with
.Qq action == TPL_SR_PUT ,
update the subsystem's rates list ptr and count to the sysctl processed values
and return the inactive list details in
.Fa rates
and
.Fa nrates
for garbage collection by
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rates .
.El
.Pp
Where templates need to be referenced via textual means, for example via a MIB
variable, the following string based template spec formats can be used:
.Bl -enum
.It
.Qq <tplname> Qc Ns
:<tplhash>
.Ns , for example
.Qq TCP_DEFAULT Qc Ns
:1731235399
.It
.Qq <tplname> Qc
.Ns , for example
.Qq TCP_DEFAULT Qc
.It
:<tplhash>
.Ns , for example
:1731235399
.El
.Pp
The first form is the normative spec format generated by the framework, while
the second and third forms are convenience formats primarily for user input.
The use of inverted commas around the template name is optional.
.Ss MIB Variables
The in-kernel
.Nm
framework exposes the following framework-specific variables in the
.Va kern.stats
branch of the
.Xr sysctl 3
MIB.
.Bl -tag -width "templates"
.It templates
Read-only CSV list of registered templates in normative template spec form.
.El
.Ss Template Management Functions
The
.Fn stats_tpl_alloc
function allocates a new template with the specified unique name and returns its
runtime-stable template slot ID for use with other API functions.
The
.Fa flags
argument is currently unused.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_tpl_fetch_allocid
function returns the runtime-stable template slot ID of any registered template
matching the specified name and hash.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_tpl_fetch
function returns the pointer to the registered template object at the specified
template slot ID.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_tpl_id2name
function returns the name of the registered template object at the specified
template slot ID.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rates
function provides a generic handler for template sample rates management and
reporting via
.Xr sysctl 3
MIB variables.
Subsystems can use this function to create a subsystem-specific
.Xr SYSCTL_PROC 9
MIB variable that manages and reports subsystem-specific template sampling
rates.
Subsystems must supply a
.Vt stats_tpl_sr_cb_t
conformant function pointer as the sysctl's
.Fa arg1 ,
which is a callback used to interact with the subsystem's stats template sample
rates list.
Subsystems can optionally specify the sysctl's
.Fa arg2
as non-zero, which causes a zero-initialized allocation of arg2-sized contextual
memory to be heap-allocated and passed in to all subsystem callbacks made during
the operation of
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rates .
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rollthedice
function makes a weighted random template selection from the supplied array of
template sampling rates.
The cumulative percentage of all sampling rates should not exceed 100.
If no seed is supplied, a PRNG is used to generate a true random number so that
every selection is independent.
If a seed is supplied, selection will be made randomly across different seeds, but
deterministically given the same seed.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_tpl_add_voistats
function is used to add a VOI and associated set of statistics to the registered
template object at the specified template slot ID.
The set of statistics is passed as an array of
.Vt struct voistatspec
which can be initialized using the
.Fn STATS_VSS_*
helper macros or manually for non-standard use cases.
For static
.Fa vss
arrays, the
.Fa nvss
count of array elements can be determined by passing
.Fa vss
to the
.Fn NVSS
macro.
The
.Dv SB_VOI_RELUPDATE
flag can be passed to configure the VOI for use with
.Fn stats_voi_update_rel_<dtype> ,
which entails maintaining an extra 8 bytes of state in the blob at each update.
.Ss Data Gathering Functions
The
.Fn stats_voi_update_abs_<dtype>
and
.Fn stats_voi_update_rel_<dtype>
functions both update all the statistics associated with the VOI identified by
.Fa voi_id .
The
.Dq abs
call uses
.Fa voival
as an absolute value, whereas the
.Dq rel
call uses
.Fa voival
as a value relative to that of the previous update function call, by adding it
to the previous value and using the result for the update.
Relative updates are only possible for VOIs that were added to the template with
the
.Dv SB_VOI_RELUPDATE
flag specified to
.Fn stats_tpl_add_voistats .
.Ss Utility Functions
The
.Fn stats_blob_alloc
function allocates and initializes a new blob based on the registered template
object at the specified template slot ID.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_blob_init
function initializes a new blob in an existing memory allocation based on the
registered template object at the specified template slot ID.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_blob_clone
function duplicates the
.Fa src
blob into
.Fa dst ,
leaving only the
.Va maxsz
field of
.Fa dst
untouched.
The
.Dv SB_CLONE_ALLOCDST
flag can be passed to instruct the function to allocate a new blob of
appropriate size into which to clone
.Fa src ,
storing the new pointer in
.Fa *dst .
The
.Dv SB_CLONE_USRDSTNOFAULT
or
.Dv SB_CLONE_USRDST
flags can be set to respectively signal that
.Xr copyout_nofault 9
or
.Xr copyout 9
should be used because
.Fa *dst
is a user space address.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_blob_snapshot
function calls
.Fn stats_blob_clone
to obtain a copy of
.Fa src
and then performs any additional functions required to produce a coherent
blob snapshot.
The flags interpreted by
.Fn stats_blob_clone
also apply to
.Fn stats_blob_snapshot .
Additionally, the
.Dv SB_CLONE_RSTSRC
flag can be used to effect a reset of the
.Fa src
blob's statistics after a snapshot is successfully taken.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_blob_destroy
function destroys a blob previously created with
.Fn stats_blob_alloc ,
.Fn stats_blob_clone
or
.Fn stats_blob_snapshot .
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_blob_visit
function allows the caller to iterate over the contents of a blob.
The callback function
.Fa func
is called for every VOI and statistic in the blob, passing a
.Vt struct sb_visit
and the user context argument
.Fa usrctx
to the callback function.
The
.Fa sbv
passed to the callback function may have one or more of the following flags set
in the
.Va flags
struct member to provide useful metadata about the iteration:
.Dv SB_IT_FIRST_CB ,
.Dv SB_IT_LAST_CB ,
.Dv SB_IT_FIRST_VOI ,
.Dv SB_IT_LAST_VOI ,
.Dv SB_IT_FIRST_VOISTAT ,
.Dv SB_IT_LAST_VOISTAT ,
.Dv SB_IT_NULLVOI
and
.Dv SB_IT_NULLVOISTAT .
Returning a non-zero value from the callback function terminates the iteration.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_blob_tostr
renders a string representation of a blob into the
.Xr sbuf 9
.Fa buf .
Currently supported render formats are
.Dv SB_STRFMT_FREEFORM
and
.Dv SB_STRFMT_JSON .
The
.Dv SB_TOSTR_OBJDUMP
flag can be passed to render version specific opaque implementation detail for
debugging or string-to-binary blob reconstruction purposes.
The
.Dv SB_TOSTR_META
flag can be passed to render template metadata into the string representation,
using the blob's template hash to lookup the corresponding template.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_voistatdata_tostr
renders a string representation of an individual statistic's data into the
.Xr sbuf 9
.Fa buf .
The same render formats supported by the
.Fn stats_blob_tostr
function can be specified, and the
.Fa objdump
boolean has the same meaning as the
.Dv SB_TOSTR_OBJDUMP
flag.
.Pp
The
.Fn stats_voistat_fetch_dptr
function returns an internal blob pointer to the specified
.Fa stype
statistic data for the VOI
.Fa voi_id .
The
.Fn stats_voistat_fetch_<dtype>
functions are convenience wrappers around
.Fn stats_voistat_fetch_dptr
to perform the extraction for simple data types.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The following notes apply to STATS_ABI_V1 format statsblobs.
.Ss Space-Time Complexity
Blobs are laid out as three distinct memory regions following the header:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
------------------------------------------------------
|   struct    | struct |   struct   |     struct     |
| statsblobv1 | voi [] | voistat [] | voistatdata [] |
------------------------------------------------------
.Ed
.Pp
Blobs store VOI and statistic blob state
.Po
8 bytes for
.Vt struct voi
and 8 bytes for
.Vt struct voistat
respectively
.Pc
in sparse arrays, using the
.Fa voi_id
and
.Vt enum voi_stype
as array indices.
This allows O(1) access to any voi/voistat pair in the blob, at the expense of
8 bytes of wasted memory per vacant slot for templates which do not specify
contiguously numbered VOIs and/or statistic types.
Data storage for statistics is only allocated for non-vacant slot pairs.
.Pp
To provide a concrete example, a blob with the following specification:
.Bl -dash
.It
Two VOIs; ID 0 and 2; added to the template in that order
.It
VOI 0 is of data type
.Vt int64_t ,
is configured with
.Dv SB_VOI_RELUPDATE
to enable support for relative updates using
.Fn stats_voi_update_rel_<dtype> ,
and has a
.Dv VS_STYPE_MIN
statistic associated with it.
.It
VOI 2 is of data type
.Vt uint32_t
with
.Dv VS_STYPE_SUM
and
.Dv VS_STYPE_MAX
statistics associated with it.
.El
.Pp
would have the following memory layout:
.Bd -literal
--------------------------------------
| header			     | struct statsblobv1, 32 bytes
|------------------------------------|
| voi[0]			     | struct voi, 8 bytes
| voi[1] (vacant)		     | struct voi, 8 bytes
| voi[2]			     | struct voi, 8 bytes
|------------------------------------|
| voi[2]voistat[VOISTATE] (vacant)   | struct voistat, 8 bytes
| voi[2]voistat[SUM]		     | struct voistat, 8 bytes
| voi[2]voistat[MAX]		     | struct voistat, 8 bytes
| voi[0]voistat[VOISTATE]	     | struct voistat, 8 bytes
| voi[0]voistat[SUM] (vacant)	     | struct voistat, 8 bytes
| voi[0]voistat[MAX] (vacant)	     | struct voistat, 8 bytes
| voi[0]voistat[MIN]		     | struct voistat, 8 bytes
|------------------------------------|
| voi[2]voistat[SUM]voistatdata      | struct voistatdata_int32, 4 bytes
| voi[2]voistat[MAX]voistatdata      | struct voistatdata_int32, 4 bytes
| voi[0]voistat[VOISTATE]voistatdata | struct voistatdata_numeric, 8 bytes
| voi[0]voistat[MIN]voistatdata      | struct voistatdata_int64, 8 bytes
--------------------------------------
				       TOTAL 136 bytes
.Ed
.Pp
When rendered to string format using
.Fn stats_blob_tostr ,
the
.Dv SB_STRFMT_FREEFORM
.Fa fmt
and the
.Dv SB_TOSTR_OBJDUMP
flag, the rendered output is:
.Bd -literal
struct statsblobv1@0x8016250a0, abi=1, endian=1, maxsz=136, cursz=136, \\
  created=6294158585626144, lastrst=6294158585626144, flags=0x0000, \\
  stats_off=56, statsdata_off=112, tplhash=2994056564
    vois[0]: id=0, name="", flags=0x0001, dtype=INT_S64, voistatmaxid=3, \\
      stats_off=80
        vois[0]stat[0]: stype=VOISTATE, flags=0x0000, dtype=VOISTATE, \\
          dsz=8, data_off=120
            voistatdata: prev=0
        vois[0]stat[1]: stype=-1
        vois[0]stat[2]: stype=-1
        vois[0]stat[3]: stype=MIN, flags=0x0000, dtype=INT_S64, \\
          dsz=8, data_off=128
            voistatdata: 9223372036854775807
    vois[1]: id=-1
    vois[2]: id=2, name="", flags=0x0000, dtype=INT_U32, voistatmaxid=2, \\
      stats_off=56
        vois[2]stat[0]: stype=-1
        vois[2]stat[1]: stype=SUM, flags=0x0000, dtype=INT_U32, dsz=4, \\
          data_off=112
            voistatdata: 0
        vois[2]stat[2]: stype=MAX, flags=0x0000, dtype=INT_U32, dsz=4, \\
          data_off=116
            voistatdata: 0
.Ed
.Pp
Note: The
.Qq \e
present in the rendered output above indicates a manual line break inserted to
keep the man page within 80 columns and is not part of the actual output.
.Ss Locking
The
.Nm
framework does not provide any concurrency protection at the individual blob
level, instead requiring that consumers guarantee mutual exclusion when calling
API functions that reference a non-template blob.
.Pp
The list of templates is protected with a
.Xr rwlock 9
in-kernel, and
.Xr pthread 3
rw lock in user space to support concurrency between template management and
blob initialization operations.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn stats_tpl_alloc
returns a runtime-stable template slot ID on success, or a negative errno on
failure.
-EINVAL is returned if any problems are detected with the arguments.
-EEXIST is returned if an existing template is registered with the same name.
-ENOMEM is returned if a required memory allocation fails.
.Pp
.Fn stats_tpl_fetch_allocid
returns a runtime-stable template slot ID, or negative errno on failure.
-ESRCH is returned if no registered template matches the specified name and/or
hash.
.Pp
.Fn stats_tpl_fetch
returns 0 on success, or ENOENT if an invalid
.Fa tpl_id
is specified.
.Pp
.Fn stats_tpl_id2name
returns 0 on success, or an errno on failure.
EOVERFLOW is returned if the length of
.Fa buf
specified by
.Fa len
is too short to hold the template's name.
ENOENT is returned if an invalid
.Fa tpl_id
is specified.
.Pp
.Fn stats_tpl_sample_rollthedice
returns a valid template slot id selected from
.Fa rates
or -1 if a NULL selection was made, that is no stats collection this roll.
.Pp
.Fn stats_tpl_add_voistats
return 0 on success, or an errno on failure.
EINVAL is returned if any problems are detected with the arguments.
EFBIG is returned if the resulting blob would have exceeded the maximum size.
EOPNOTSUPP is returned if an attempt is made to add more VOI stats to a
previously configured VOI.
ENOMEM is returned if a required memory allocation fails.
.Pp
.Fn stats_voi_update_abs_<dtype>
and
.Fn stats_voi_update_rel_<dtype>
return 0 on success, or EINVAL if any problems are detected with the arguments.
.Pp
.Fn stats_blob_init
returns 0 on success, or an errno on failure.
EINVAL is returned if any problems are detected with the arguments.
EOVERFLOW is returned if the template blob's
.Fa cursz
is larger than the
.Fa maxsz
of the blob being initialized.
.Pp
.Fn stats_blob_alloc
returns a pointer to a newly allocated and initialized blob based on the
specified template with slot ID
.Fa tpl_id ,
or NULL if the memory allocation failed.
.Pp
.Fn stats_blob_clone
and
.Fn stats_blob_snapshot
return 0 on success, or an errno on failure.
EINVAL is returned if any problems are detected with the arguments.
ENOMEM is returned if the SB_CLONE_ALLOCDST flag was specified and the memory
allocation for
.Fa dst
fails.
EOVERFLOW is returned if the src blob's
.Fa cursz
is larger than the
.Fa maxsz
of the
.Fa dst
blob.
.Pp
.Fn stats_blob_visit
returns 0 on success, or EINVAL if any problems are detected with the arguments.
.Pp
.Fn stats_blob_tostr
and
.Fn stats_voistatdata_tostr
return 0 on success, or an errno on failure.
EINVAL is returned if any problems are detected with the arguments, otherwise
any error returned by
.Fn sbuf_error
for
.Fa buf
is returned.
.Pp
.Fn stats_voistat_fetch_dptr
returns 0 on success, or EINVAL if any problems are detected with the arguments.
.Pp
.Fn stats_voistat_fetch_<dtype>
returns 0 on success, or an errno on failure.
EINVAL is returned if any problems are detected with the arguments.
EFTYPE is returned if the requested data type does not match the blob's data
type for the specified
.Fa voi_id
and
.Fa stype .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr errno 2 ,
.Xr arb 3 ,
.Xr qmath 3 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr sbuf 9
.Rs
.%A "Ted Dunning"
.%A "Otmar Ertl"
.%T "Computing Extremely Accurate Quantiles Using t-digests"
.%U "https://github.com/tdunning/t-digest/raw/master/docs/t-digest-paper/histo.pdf"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
framework first appeared in
.Fx 13.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
framework and this manual page were written by
.An Lawrence Stewart Aq lstewart@FreeBSD.org
and sponsored by Netflix, Inc.
