@c Copyright (C) 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GAS manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file as.texinfo.
@page
@node H8/500-Dependent
@chapter H8/500 Dependent Features

@cindex H8/500 support
@menu
* H8/500 Options::              Options
* H8/500 Syntax::               Syntax
* H8/500 Floating Point::       Floating Point
* H8/500 Directives::           H8/500 Machine Directives
* H8/500 Opcodes::              Opcodes
@end menu

@node H8/500 Options
@section Options

@cindex H8/500 options (none)
@cindex options, H8/500 (none)
@code{@value{AS}} has no additional command-line options for the
Renesas (formerly Hitachi) H8/500 family.

@node H8/500 Syntax
@section Syntax

@menu
* H8/500-Chars::                Special Characters
* H8/500-Regs::                 Register Names
* H8/500-Addressing::           Addressing Modes
@end menu

@node H8/500-Chars
@subsection Special Characters

@cindex line comment character, H8/500
@cindex H8/500 line comment character
@samp{!} is the line comment character.

@cindex line separator, H8/500
@cindex statement separator, H8/500
@cindex H8/500 line separator
@samp{;} can be used instead of a newline to separate statements.

@cindex symbol names, @samp{$} in
@cindex @code{$} in symbol names
Since @samp{$} has no special meaning, you may use it in symbol names.

@node H8/500-Regs
@subsection Register Names

@cindex H8/500 registers
@cindex registers, H8/500
You can use the predefined symbols @samp{r0}, @samp{r1}, @samp{r2},
@samp{r3}, @samp{r4}, @samp{r5}, @samp{r6}, and @samp{r7} to refer to
the H8/500 registers.

The H8/500 also has these control registers:

@table @code
@item cp
code pointer

@item dp
data pointer

@item bp
base pointer

@item tp
stack top pointer

@item ep
extra pointer

@item sr
status register

@item ccr
condition code register
@end table

All registers are 16 bits long.  To represent 32 bit numbers, use two
adjacent registers; for distant memory addresses, use one of the segment
pointers (@code{cp} for the program counter; @code{dp} for
@code{r0}--@code{r3}; @code{ep} for @code{r4} and @code{r5}; and
@code{tp} for @code{r6} and @code{r7}.

@node H8/500-Addressing
@subsection Addressing Modes

@cindex addressing modes, H8/500
@cindex H8/500 addressing modes
@value{AS} understands the following addressing modes for the H8/500:
@table @code
@item R@var{n}
Register direct

@item @@R@var{n}
Register indirect

@item @@(d:8, R@var{n})
Register indirect with 8 bit signed displacement

@item @@(d:16, R@var{n})
Register indirect with 16 bit signed displacement

@item @@-R@var{n}
Register indirect with pre-decrement

@item @@R@var{n}+
Register indirect with post-increment

@item @@@var{aa}:8
8 bit absolute address

@item @@@var{aa}:16
16 bit absolute address

@item #@var{xx}:8
8 bit immediate

@item #@var{xx}:16
16 bit immediate
@end table

@node H8/500 Floating Point
@section Floating Point

@cindex floating point, H8/500 (@sc{ieee})
@cindex H8/500 floating point (@sc{ieee})
The H8/500 family has no hardware floating point, but the @code{.float}
directive generates @sc{ieee} floating-point numbers for compatibility
with other development tools.

@node H8/500 Directives
@section H8/500 Machine Directives

@cindex H8/500 machine directives (none)
@cindex machine directives, H8/500 (none)
@cindex @code{word} directive, H8/500
@cindex @code{int} directive, H8/500
@code{@value{AS}} has no machine-dependent directives for the H8/500.
However, on this platform the @samp{.int} and @samp{.word} directives
generate 16-bit numbers.

@node H8/500 Opcodes
@section Opcodes

@cindex H8/500 opcode summary
@cindex opcode summary, H8/500
@cindex mnemonics, H8/500
@cindex instruction summary, H8/500
For detailed information on the H8/500 machine instruction set, see
@cite{H8/500 Series Programming Manual} (Renesas M21T001).

@code{@value{AS}} implements all the standard H8/500 opcodes.  No additional
pseudo-instructions are needed on this family.

@ifset SMALL
@c this table, due to the multi-col faking and hardcoded order, looks silly
@c except in smallbook.  See comments below "@set SMALL" near top of this file.

The following table summarizes H8/500 opcodes and their operands:

@c Use @group if it ever works, instead of @page
@page
@smallexample
@i{Legend:}
abs8      @r{8-bit absolute address}
abs16     @r{16-bit absolute address}
abs24     @r{24-bit absolute address}
crb       @r{@code{ccr}, @code{br}, @code{ep}, @code{dp}, @code{tp}, @code{dp}}
disp8     @r{8-bit displacement}
ea        @r{@code{rn}, @code{@@rn}, @code{@@(d:8, rn)}, @code{@@(d:16, rn)},}
          @r{@code{@@-rn}, @code{@@rn+}, @code{@@aa:8}, @code{@@aa:16},}
          @r{@code{#xx:8}, @code{#xx:16}}
ea_mem    @r{@code{@@rn}, @code{@@(d:8, rn)}, @code{@@(d:16, rn)},}
          @r{@code{@@-rn}, @code{@@rn+}, @code{@@aa:8}, @code{@@aa:16}}
ea_noimm  @r{@code{rn}, @code{@@rn}, @code{@@(d:8, rn)}, @code{@@(d:16, rn)},}
          @r{@code{@@-rn}, @code{@@rn+}, @code{@@aa:8}, @code{@@aa:16}}
fp        r6
imm4      @r{4-bit immediate data}
imm8      @r{8-bit immediate data}
imm16     @r{16-bit immediate data}
pcrel8    @r{8-bit offset from program counter}
pcrel16   @r{16-bit offset from program counter}
qim       @r{@code{-2}, @code{-1}, @code{1}, @code{2}}
rd        @r{any register}
rs        @r{a register distinct from rd}
rlist     @r{comma-separated list of registers in parentheses;}
          @r{register ranges @code{rd-rs} are allowed}
sp        @r{stack pointer (@code{r7})}
sr        @r{status register}
sz        @r{size; @samp{.b} or @samp{.w}.  If omitted, default @samp{.w}}

ldc[.b] ea,crb                 bcc[.w] pcrel16
ldc[.w] ea,sr                  bcc[.b] pcrel8 
add[:q] sz qim,ea_noimm        bhs[.w] pcrel16
add[:g] sz ea,rd               bhs[.b] pcrel8 
adds sz ea,rd                  bcs[.w] pcrel16
addx sz ea,rd                  bcs[.b] pcrel8 
and sz ea,rd                   blo[.w] pcrel16
andc[.b] imm8,crb              blo[.b] pcrel8 
andc[.w] imm16,sr              bne[.w] pcrel16
bpt                            bne[.b] pcrel8 
bra[.w] pcrel16                beq[.w] pcrel16
bra[.b] pcrel8                 beq[.b] pcrel8 
bt[.w] pcrel16                 bvc[.w] pcrel16
bt[.b] pcrel8                  bvc[.b] pcrel8 
brn[.w] pcrel16                bvs[.w] pcrel16
brn[.b] pcrel8                 bvs[.b] pcrel8 
bf[.w] pcrel16                 bpl[.w] pcrel16
bf[.b] pcrel8                  bpl[.b] pcrel8 
bhi[.w] pcrel16                bmi[.w] pcrel16
bhi[.b] pcrel8                 bmi[.b] pcrel8 
bls[.w] pcrel16                bge[.w] pcrel16
bls[.b] pcrel8                 bge[.b] pcrel8 
@page
blt[.w] pcrel16                mov[:g][.b] imm8,ea_mem       
blt[.b] pcrel8                 mov[:g][.w] imm16,ea_mem      
bgt[.w] pcrel16                movfpe[.b] ea,rd              
bgt[.b] pcrel8                 movtpe[.b] rs,ea_noimm        
ble[.w] pcrel16                mulxu sz ea,rd                
ble[.b] pcrel8                 neg sz ea                     
bclr sz imm4,ea_noimm          nop                           
bclr sz rs,ea_noimm            not sz ea                     
bnot sz imm4,ea_noimm          or sz ea,rd                   
bnot sz rs,ea_noimm            orc[.b] imm8,crb              
bset sz imm4,ea_noimm          orc[.w] imm16,sr              
bset sz rs,ea_noimm            pjmp abs24                    
bsr[.b] pcrel8                 pjmp @@rd                     
bsr[.w] pcrel16                pjsr abs24                    
btst sz imm4,ea_noimm          pjsr @@rd                     
btst sz rs,ea_noimm            prtd imm8                     
clr sz ea                      prtd imm16                    
cmp[:e][.b] imm8,rd            prts                          
cmp[:i][.w] imm16,rd           rotl sz ea                    
cmp[:g].b imm8,ea_noimm        rotr sz ea                    
cmp[:g][.w] imm16,ea_noimm     rotxl sz ea                   
Cmp[:g] sz ea,rd               rotxr sz ea                   
dadd rs,rd                     rtd imm8                     
divxu sz ea,rd                 rtd imm16                    
dsub rs,rd                     rts                          
exts[.b] rd                    scb/f rs,pcrel8               
extu[.b] rd                    scb/ne rs,pcrel8             
jmp @@rd                        scb/eq rs,pcrel8             
jmp @@(imm8,rd)                 shal sz ea                   
jmp @@(imm16,rd)                shar sz ea                    
jmp abs16                      shll sz ea            
jsr @@rd                        shlr sz ea            
jsr @@(imm8,rd)                 sleep                 
jsr @@(imm16,rd)                stc[.b] crb,ea_noimm  
jsr abs16                      stc[.w] sr,ea_noimm   
ldm @@sp+,(rlist)               stm (rlist),@@-sp     
link fp,imm8                   sub sz ea,rd          
link fp,imm16                  subs sz ea,rd         
mov[:e][.b] imm8,rd            subx sz ea,rd         
mov[:i][.w] imm16,rd           swap[.b] rd           
mov[:l][.w] abs8,rd            tas[.b] ea     
mov[:l].b abs8,rd              trapa imm4     
mov[:s][.w] rs,abs8            trap/vs        
mov[:s].b rs,abs8              tst sz ea      
mov[:f][.w] @@(disp8,fp),rd     unlk fp        
mov[:f][.w] rs,@@(disp8,fp)     xch[.w] rs,rd 
mov[:f].b @@(disp8,fp),rd       xor sz ea,rd   
mov[:f].b rs,@@(disp8,fp)       xorc.b imm8,crb
mov[:g] sz rs,ea_mem           xorc.w imm16,sr
mov[:g] sz ea,rd              
@end smallexample
@end ifset
