.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd May 26, 2012
.Dt OPENPAM_READLINE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm openpam_readline
.Nd read a line from a file
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In stdio.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.In security/openpam.h
.Ft "char *"
.Fn openpam_readline "FILE *f" "int *lineno" "size_t *lenp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bf Sy
This function is deprecated and may be removed in a future release without further warning.
The
.Fn openpam_readlinev
function may be used to achieve similar results.
.Ef
.Pp
The
.Fn openpam_readline
function reads a line from a file, and returns it
in a NUL-terminated buffer allocated with
.Xr malloc 3 .
.Pp
The
.Fn openpam_readline
function performs a certain amount of processing
on the data it reads:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Comments (introduced by a hash sign) are stripped.
.It
Blank lines are ignored.
.It
If a line ends in a backslash, the backslash is stripped and the
next line is appended.
.El
.Pp
If
.Fa lineno
is not
.Dv NULL ,
the integer variable it points to is
incremented every time a newline character is read.
.Pp
If
.Fa lenp
is not
.Dv NULL ,
the length of the line (not including the
terminating NUL character) is stored in the variable it points to.
.Pp
The caller is responsible for releasing the returned buffer by passing
it to
.Xr free 3 .
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn openpam_readline
function returns
.Dv NULL
on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openpam_readlinev 3 ,
.Xr openpam_readword 3 ,
.Xr pam 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn openpam_readline
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn openpam_readline
function and this manual page were
developed for the
.Fx
Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the
Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.\& under
DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
