.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd May 26, 2012
.Dt OPENPAM_SET_FEATURE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm openpam_set_feature
.Nd enable or disable an optional feature
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.In security/openpam.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn openpam_set_feature "int feature" "int onoff"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bf Sy
This function is experimental and may be modified or removed in a future release without further warning.
.Ef
.Pp
The
.Fn openpam_set_feature
function sets the state of the specified
feature to the value specified by the
.Fa onoff
argument.
See
.Xr openpam_get_feature 3
for a list of recognized features.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn openpam_set_feature
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_SYMBOL_ERR
Invalid symbol.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openpam_get_feature 3 ,
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn openpam_set_feature
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn openpam_set_feature
function and this manual page were
developed by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@des.no .
