.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd March 3, 2013
.Dt OPENPAM_STRADDCH 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm openpam_straddch
.Nd add a character to a string, expanding the buffer if needed
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.In security/openpam.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn openpam_straddch "char **str" "size_t *size" "size_t *len" "int ch"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn openpam_straddch
function appends a character to a dynamically
allocated NUL-terminated buffer, reallocating the buffer as needed.
.Pp
The
.Fa str
argument points to a variable containing either a pointer to
an existing buffer or
.Dv NULL .
If the value of the variable pointed to by
.Fa str
is
.Dv NULL ,
a new buffer
is allocated.
.Pp
The
.Fa size
and
.Fa len
argument point to variables used to hold the size
of the buffer and the length of the string it contains, respectively.
.Pp
The final argument,
.Fa ch ,
is the character that should be appended to
the string.  If
.Fa ch
is 0, nothing is appended, but a new buffer is
still allocated if
.Fa str
is NULL.  This can be used to
.Do
bootstrap
.Dc
the
string.
.Pp
If a new buffer is allocated or an existing buffer is reallocated to
make room for the additional character,
.Fa str
and
.Fa size
are updated
accordingly.
.Pp
The
.Fn openpam_straddch
function ensures that the buffer is always
NUL-terminated.
.Pp
If the
.Fn openpam_straddch
function is successful, it increments the
integer variable pointed to by
.Fa len
(unless
.Fa ch
was 0) and returns 0.
Otherwise, it leaves the variables pointed to by
.Fa str ,
.Fa size
and
.Fa len
unmodified, sets
.Va errno
to
.Dv ENOMEM
and returns -1.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn openpam_straddch
function returns 0 on success and -1 on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn openpam_straddch
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn openpam_straddch
function and this manual page were
developed by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@des.no .
