.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd May 26, 2012
.Dt OPENPAM_READLINEV 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm openpam_readlinev
.Nd read a line from a file and split it into words
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In stdio.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.In security/openpam.h
.Ft "char **"
.Fn openpam_readlinev "FILE *f" "int *lineno" "int *lenp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn openpam_readlinev
function reads a line from a file, splits it
into words according to the rules described in the
.Xr openpam_readword 3
manual page, and returns a list of those words.
.Pp
If
.Fa lineno
is not
.Dv NULL ,
the integer variable it points to is
incremented every time a newline character is read.
This includes quoted or escaped newline characters and the newline
character at the end of the line.
.Pp
If
.Fa lenp
is not
.Dv NULL ,
the number of words on the line is stored in the
variable to which it points.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the
.Fn openpam_readlinev
function returns a pointer to a
dynamically allocated array of pointers to individual dynamically
allocated NUL-terminated strings, each containing a single word, in the
order in which they were encountered on the line.
The array is terminated by a
.Dv NULL
pointer.
.Pp
The caller is responsible for freeing both the array and the individual
strings by passing each of them to
.Xr free 3 .
.Pp
If the end of the line was reached before any words were read,
.Fn openpam_readlinev
returns a pointer to a dynamically allocated array
containing a single
.Dv NULL
pointer.
.Pp
The
.Fn openpam_readlinev
function can fail and return
.Dv NULL
for one of
four reasons:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The end of the file was reached before any words were read;
.Va errno
is
zero,
.Xr ferror 3
returns zero, and
.Xr feof 3
returns a non-zero value.
.It
The end of the file was reached while a quote or backslash escape
was in effect;
.Va errno
is set to
.Dv EINVAL ,
.Xr ferror 3
returns zero, and
.Xr feof 3
returns a non-zero value.
.It
An error occurred while reading from the file;
.Va errno
is non-zero,
.Xr ferror 3
returns a non-zero value and
.Xr feof 3
returns zero.
.It
A
.Xr malloc 3
or
.Xr realloc 3
call failed;
.Va errno
is set to
.Dv ENOMEM ,
.Xr ferror 3
returns a non-zero value, and
.Xr feof 3
may or may not return
a non-zero value.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openpam_readline 3 ,
.Xr openpam_readword 3 ,
.Xr pam 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn openpam_readlinev
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn openpam_readlinev
function and this manual page were
developed by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@des.no .
