.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd May 26, 2012
.Dt OPENPAM_GET_FEATURE 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm openpam_get_feature
.Nd query the state of an optional feature
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.In security/openpam.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn openpam_get_feature "int feature" "int *onoff"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bf Sy
This function is experimental and may be modified or removed in a future release without further warning.
.Ef
.Pp
The
.Fn openpam_get_feature
function stores the current state of the
specified feature in the variable pointed to by its
.Fa onoff
argument.
.Pp
The following features are recognized:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Dv OPENPAM_RESTRICT_SERVICE_NAME
Disallow path separators in service names.
This feature is enabled by default.
Disabling it allows the application to specify the path to
the desired policy file directly.
.It Dv OPENPAM_VERIFY_POLICY_FILE
Verify the ownership and permissions of the policy file
and the path leading up to it.
This feature is enabled by default.
.It Dv OPENPAM_RESTRICT_MODULE_NAME
Disallow path separators in module names.
This feature is disabled by default.
Enabling it prevents the use of modules in non-standard
locations.
.It Dv OPENPAM_VERIFY_MODULE_FILE
Verify the ownership and permissions of each loadable
module and the path leading up to it.
This feature is enabled by default.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn openpam_get_feature
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_SYMBOL_ERR
Invalid symbol.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openpam_set_feature 3 ,
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Fn openpam_get_feature
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn openpam_get_feature
function and this manual page were
developed by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@des.no .
