.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $P4$
.\"
.Dd January 6, 2003
.Dt OPENPAM_TTYCONV 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm openpam_ttyconv
.Nd simple tty-based conversation function
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.In security/openpam.h
.Ft int
.Fn openpam_ttyconv "int n" "const struct pam_message **msg" "struct pam_response **resp" "void *data"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
function is a standard conversation function
suitable for use on TTY devices.  It should be adequate for the needs
of most text-based interactive programs.
.Pp
The
.Nm
function allows the application to specify a
timeout for user input by setting the global variable
.Va openpam_ttyconv_timeout
to the length of the timeout in seconds.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Nm
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_BUF_ERR
Memory buffer error.
.It Bq Er PAM_CONV_ERR
Conversation failure.
.It Bq Er PAM_SYSTEM_ERR
System error.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openpam_nullconv 3 ,
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_prompt 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3 ,
.Xr pam_vprompt 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
function and this manual page were developed for the FreeBSD Project
by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the Security
Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.  under DARPA/SPAWAR
contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
