.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd May 26, 2012
.Dt PAM_GET_USER 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pam_get_user
.Nd retrieve user name
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn pam_get_user "pam_handle_t *pamh" "const char **user" "const char *prompt"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pam_get_user
function returns the name of the target user, as
specified to
.Xr pam_start 3 .
If no user was specified, nor set using
.Xr pam_set_item 3 ,
.Fn pam_get_user
will prompt for a user name.
Either way, a pointer to the user name is stored in the location
pointed to by the
.Fa user
argument.
.Pp
The
.Fa prompt
argument specifies a prompt to use if no user name is
cached.
If it is
.Dv NULL ,
the
.Dv PAM_USER_PROMPT
item will be used.
If that item is also
.Dv NULL ,
a hardcoded default prompt will be used.
Either way, the prompt is expanded using
.Xr openpam_subst 3
before it is
passed to the conversation function.
.Pp
If
.Fn pam_get_user
is called from a module and the
.Dv user_prompt
option is
set in the policy file, the value of that option takes precedence over
both the
.Fa prompt
argument and the
.Dv PAM_USER_PROMPT
item.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pam_get_user
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_BUF_ERR
Memory buffer error.
.It Bq Er PAM_CONV_ERR
Conversation failure.
.It Bq Er PAM_SYSTEM_ERR
System error.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr openpam_subst 3 ,
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_get_authtok 3 ,
.Xr pam_get_item 3 ,
.Xr pam_set_item 3 ,
.Xr pam_start 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%T "X/Open Single Sign-On Service (XSSO) - Pluggable Authentication Modules"
.%D "June 1997"
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn pam_get_user
function and this manual page were
developed for the
.Fx
Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the
Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.\& under
DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
