.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2011 Dag-Erling Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\"
.Dd May 26, 2012
.Dt PAM_GET_ITEM 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pam_get_item
.Nd get PAM information
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn pam_get_item "const pam_handle_t *pamh" "int item_type" "const void **item"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn pam_get_item
function stores a pointer to the item specified by
the
.Fa item_type
argument in the location pointed to by the
.Fa item
argument.
The item is retrieved from the PAM context specified by the
.Fa pamh
argument.
If
.Fn pam_get_item
fails, the
.Fa item
argument is untouched.
.Pp
The following item types are recognized:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Dv PAM_SERVICE
The name of the requesting service.
.It Dv PAM_USER
The name of the user the application is trying to
authenticate.
.It Dv PAM_TTY
The name of the current terminal.
.It Dv PAM_RHOST
The name of the applicant's host.
.It Dv PAM_CONV
A
.Vt struct pam_conv
describing the current conversation
function.
.It Dv PAM_AUTHTOK
The current authentication token.
.It Dv PAM_OLDAUTHTOK
The expired authentication token.
.It Dv PAM_RUSER
The name of the applicant.
.It Dv PAM_USER_PROMPT
The prompt to use when asking the applicant for a user
name to authenticate as.
.It Dv PAM_AUTHTOK_PROMPT
The prompt to use when asking the applicant for an
authentication token.
.It Dv PAM_OLDAUTHTOK_PROMPT
The prompt to use when asking the applicant for an
expired authentication token prior to changing it.
.It Dv PAM_HOST
The name of the host the application runs on.
.El
.Pp
See
.Xr pam_start 3
for a description of
.Vt struct pam_conv .
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn pam_get_item
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_SYMBOL_ERR
Invalid symbol.
.It Bq Er PAM_SYSTEM_ERR
System error.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_set_item 3 ,
.Xr pam_start 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3
.Sh STANDARDS
.Rs
.%T "X/Open Single Sign-On Service (XSSO) - Pluggable Authentication Modules"
.%D "June 1997"
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Fn pam_get_item
function and this manual page were
developed for the
.Fx
Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the
Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.\& under
DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
