.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by ThinkSec AS and
.\" Network Associates Laboratories, the Security Research Division of
.\" Network Associates, Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.\" ("CBOSS"), as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote
.\"    products derived from this software without specific prior written
.\"    permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $P4$
.\"
.Dd June 16, 2005
.Dt PAM_VPROMPT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pam_vprompt
.Nd call the conversation function
.Sh LIBRARY
.Lb libpam
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In security/pam_appl.h
.Ft "int"
.Fn pam_vprompt "pam_handle_t *pamh" "int style" "char **resp" "const char *fmt" "va_list ap"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
function constructs a string from the
.Fa fmt
and
.Fa ap
arguments using
.Xr vsnprintf 3 ,
and passes it to the given PAM context's
conversation function.
.Pp
The
.Fa style
argument specifies the type of interaction requested, and
must be one of the following:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Dv PAM_PROMPT_ECHO_OFF
Display the message and obtain the user's response without
displaying it.
.It Dv PAM_PROMPT_ECHO_ON
Display the message and obtain the user's response.
.It Dv PAM_ERROR_MSG
Display the message as an error message, and do not wait
for a response.
.It Dv PAM_TEXT_INFO
Display the message as an informational message, and do
not wait for a response.
.El
.Pp
A pointer to the response, or
.Dv NULL
if the conversation function did
not return one, is stored in the location pointed to by the
.Fa resp
argument.
.Pp
The message and response should not exceed
.Dv PAM_MAX_MSG_SIZE
or
.Dv PAM_MAX_RESP_SIZE ,
respectively.
If they do, they may be truncated.
.Pp
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Nm
function returns one of the following values:
.Bl -tag -width 18n
.It Bq Er PAM_BUF_ERR
Memory buffer error.
.It Bq Er PAM_CONV_ERR
Conversation failure.
.It Bq Er PAM_SYSTEM_ERR
System error.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pam 3 ,
.Xr pam_error 3 ,
.Xr pam_info 3 ,
.Xr pam_prompt 3 ,
.Xr pam_strerror 3 ,
.Xr pam_verror 3 ,
.Xr pam_vinfo 3 ,
.Xr vsnprintf 3
.Sh STANDARDS
The
.Nm
function is an OpenPAM extension.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
function and this manual page were developed for the
.Fx
Project by ThinkSec AS and Network Associates Laboratories, the
Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc.\& under
DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
