@ignore
This file is completely identical to hsuser.texinfo, except that it has the
reference to the programming manual removed.  There are definately better ways
to do this!

This file documents the user interface to the GNU History library.

Copyright (C) 1988, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
Authored by Brian Fox.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved on
all copies.

Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
GNU Copyright statement is available to the distributee, and provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end ignore

@node Using History Interactively
@appendix Using History Interactively

This chapter describes how to use the GNU History Library interactively,
from a user's standpoint.

@menu
* History Interaction::		What it feels like using History as a user.
@end menu

@node History Interaction
@section History Interaction
@cindex expansion

The History library provides a history expansion feature similar
to the history expansion in @code{csh}.  The following text describes the 
syntax you use to manipulate history information.

History expansion takes two parts.  In the first part, determine
which line from the previous history will be used for substitution.
This line is called the @dfn{event}.
In the second part, select portions of that line for inclusion into the
current line.  These portions are called @dfn{words}.  
@value{GDBN} breaks the line into words in the same 
way that the Bash shell does, so that several English (or Unix) words
surrounded by quotes are considered one word.

@menu
* Event Designators::	How to specify which history line to use.
* Word Designators::	Specifying which words are of interest.
* Modifiers::		Modifying the results of susbstitution.
@end menu

@node Event Designators
@subsection Event Designators
@cindex event designators

An @dfn{event designator} is a reference to a command line entry in the
history list.

@table @asis

@item @code{!}
Start a history subsititution, except when followed by a space, tab, or
the end of the line... @key{=} or @key{(}.

@item @code{!!}
Refer to the previous command.  This is a synonym for @code{!-1}.

@item @code{!n}
Refer to command line @var{n}.

@item @code{!-n}
Refer to the command line @var{n} lines back.

@item @code{!string}
Refer to the most recent command starting with @var{string}.

@item @code{!?string}[@code{?}]
Refer to the most recent command containing @var{string}.

@end table

@node Word Designators
@subsection Word Designators

A @key{:} separates the event designator from the @dfn{word designator}.  
It can be omitted if the word designator begins with a @key{^}, @key{$},
@key{*} or @key{%}.  Words are numbered from the beginning of the line,
with the first word being denoted by a 0 (zero).

@table @code

@item 0 (zero)
The zero'th word.  For many applications, this is the command word.

@item n
The @var{n}'th word.

@item ^
The first argument.  that is, word 1.

@item $
The last argument.

@item %
The word matched by the most recent @code{?string?} search.

@item x-y
A range of words; @code{-@var{y}} Abbreviates @code{0-@var{y}}.

@item *
All of the words, excepting the zero'th.  This is a synonym for @code{1-$}.
It is not an error to use @key{*} if there is just one word in the event.
The empty string is returned in that case.

@end table

@node Modifiers
@subsection Modifiers

After the optional word designator, you can add a sequence of one or more
of the following @dfn{modifiers}, each preceded by a @key{:}.

@table @code

@item #
The entire command line typed so far.  This means the current command,
not the previous command.
@c
@c  FIXME:  If it doesn't belong here, let's put it where it does. 
@c
@c  so it technically isn't a word designator and doesn't belong in 
@c  this section.

@item h
Remove a trailing pathname component, leaving only the head.

@item r
Remove a trailing suffix of the form @samp{.}@var{suffix}, leaving the basename.

@item e
Remove all but the suffix.

@item t
Remove all leading  pathname  components, leaving the tail.

@item p
Print the new command but do not execute it.
@end table
