.\"
.\"	$Id$
.\"
.Dd January 28, 1998
.br
.in +0.5i
.Dt BKTR 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD 2.2
.Sh NAME
.Nm brooktree
.Nd video capture driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm device bktr0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm bktr
driver provides support for PCI
.Em video
capture on low cost, high performance boards.  The driver is heavily based on
the Matrox Meteor driver.  The bktr driver should support most video cards
based on the
.Em Brooktree Bt848 Video Capture Chip.
.Pp
Specifically, the following cards are known to work: 
.br
.Em Hauppage Wincast TV
.br
.Em STB TV PCI Television Tuner
.br
.Em Miro PC TV
.br
.Em Intel Smart Video Recorder III
.Pp
The driver currently supports the following features:
.br
.in +0.5i
PCI to PCI dma transfer
.br
clipping
.br
yuv
.br
rgb16
.br
rgb24
.br
rgb32
.in -0.5i
.Pp
The following kernel parameters may be used to further configure the driver:
.Pp
.Em options "BROOKTREE_ALLOC_PAGES=xxx"
specifies the number of contiguous pages to allocate when successfully
probed.  The default number of pages allocated by the kernel is 216.
This means that there are (216*4096) bytes available for use.
.Pp
.Sh AUTHOR
This driver is based on the work of
.An Jim Lowe Aq james@miller.cs.uwm.edu ,
.An Mark Tinguely Aq tinguely@plains.nodak.edu ,
.An Amancio Hasty Aq hasty@star-gate.com
and a bunch of other people.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/examples/meteor -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/examples/meteor
Examples of what you can do with the (similarly designed) Meteor driver.
.It Pa /usr/ports/graphics/fxtv
A display program utilizing the bktr driver - requires that
.Em The X Window System
and
.Em The Ports Collection
also be installed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr meteor 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
