.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 James A. Jegers
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id$
.\"
.Dd July 10, 1995
.Dt EL 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm el
.Nd Ethernet driver for 3Com Etherlink 3C501 device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device el0 at isa? port 0x300 net irq 9 vector elintr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface provides support for the 3Com 3c501 8bit ISA ethernet card.
The 3c501 card is known to be quite slow, and a different ethernet card
should be used if possible.
However, they allows inexpensive access to 10 Mb/s Ethernet networks.
.Pp
The valid I/O ports are in the range 0x280-0x3f0.
.Sh BUGS
The driver assumes the card is configured for the same IRQ the kernel is.
No probing or checking is done to determine if this is the case.
.Pp
Does not currently support DMA.
.Pp
Does not currently support multicasts.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ed 4 ,
.Xr eg 4 ,
.Xr ep 4 ,
.Xr ie 4 ,
.Xr le 4
