.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 David E. O'Brien
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 19, 1997
.Dt EX 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ex
.Nd "Ethernet device driver for the Intel EtherExpress Pro/10 and Pro/10+"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ex0 at isa? port? irq ?"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the 16-bit PCI Intel EtherExpress Pro/10
and Pro/10+ Ethernet cards based on the Intel i82595 chip.
.Pp
If the port start address isn't found, the card will be searched for in the
I/O address range 0x200 - 0x3a0.  If the IRQ isn't specified, it will be
read from the EEPROM on the card.  For correct operation on newer
cards the Plug-N-Play support should be disabled.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ex%d: Intel EtherExpress Pro/10, address %6D, connector %s"
The device probe found an installed card, and was able to correctly install
the device driver.
.It "ex%d: WARNING: board's EEPROM is configured for IRQ %d, using %d"
The device probe detected that the board is configured for a different
interrupt than the one specified in the kernel configuration file.
.It "ex%d: invalid IRQ."
The device probe detected an invalid IRQ setting.
.El
.Sh BUGS
Currently the driver does not support multicast.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Javier Mart\('in Rueda .
This manual page was written by
.An David E. O'Brien .
