.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Dag-Erling Coïdan Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 11, 2004
.Dt ICHWD 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ichwd
.Nd Intel ICH watchdog timer driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device ichwd
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides access to the watchdog timer (WDT) present on all
Intel ICH chipsets.
.Pp
The ICH WDT counts down in ticks of approximately 0.6 seconds; the
exact value depends on hardware quality and environmental factors.
Supported watchdog intervals range from 2 to 63 ticks.
.Pp
Note that on some ICH-based systems, the WDT may be present but
disabled, either in hardware or by the BIOS.
The
.Nm
driver attempts to detect this condition and will refuse to attach if
it believes the WDT is disabled.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 8 ,
.Xr watchdogd 8 ,
.Xr watchdog 9
.Rs
.%T Using the Intel ICH Family Watchdog Timer (WDT)
.%R Intel Application Note AP-725
.%O Document Number 292273-001
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Wm. Daryl Hawkins Aq dhawkins@tamu.edu
and
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
