.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994, Wilko Bulte
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 16, 2005
.Dt IE 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ie
.Nd "Ethernet device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ie"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ie_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.ie.0.at="isa"
.Cd hint.ie.0.port="0x300"
.Cd hint.ie.0.irq="5"
.Cd hint.ie.0.maddr="0xd0000"
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver provides supports the following 8 and 16bit ISA Ethernet cards
that are based on the Intel i82586 chip:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3COM 3C507
.It
AT&T EN100
.It
AT&T Starlan 10
.It
AT&T Starlan Fiber
.It
Intel EtherExpress 16
.It
RACAL Interlan NI5210
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ie%d: unknown board type code %d"
An i82586 chip was found, but the driver was unable to determine the actual
board type during the probe.
.It "ie%d: kernel configured maddr %x doesn't match board configured maddr %x"
The device probe detected a different maddr than the one specified in the
kernel configuration file.
.It "ie%d: can't find shared memory"
The device probe could not access the shared memory to determine its size.
.It "ie%d: kernel configured msize %d doesn't match board configured msize %d"
The device probe found a different size for the shared memory than the one
specified in the kernel configuration file.
.It "ie%d: kernel configured irq %d doesn't match board configured irq %d"
The device probe detected that the board is configured for a different
interrupt than the one specified in the kernel configuration file.
.It "ie%d: reset"
The Intel i82586 had to be reset by the driver.
.It "ie%d: transceiver problem"
The driver has detected a problem with the Ethernet transceiver.
This is
usually due to a loose or broken transceiver cable when using an external
transceiver.
When you experience this problem with an on-card transceiver
your card may be incorrectly jumpered for to use an external transceiver.
Worst case your on-board transceiver may be broken.
.It "ie%d: TDR detected an open %d clocks away"
The driver detected an open circuit in the Ethernet cable.
Check your
coax cable and terminator resistors.
.It "ie%d: TDR detected a short %d clocks away"
The driver detected a short circuit in the Ethernet cable.
Check your
coax cable and terminator resistors.
.It "ie%d: TDR returned unknown status %x"
The driver got an unknown status from the card during the Ethernet cable
test.
.It "ie%d: multicast address setup command failed"
The card could not be put into multicast mode.
.It "ie%d: configure command failed"
The card refused to respond correctly during configuration.
.It "ie%d: individual address setup command failed"
The programming of the Ethernet (MAC) address failed.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Garrett A. Wollman ,
based on code by
.An William F. Jolitz
and Lawrence Berkeley Laboratories.
.Tn 3C507
support was written by
.An Charles M. Hannum .
This manual page was written by
.An Wilko C. Bulte .
.Sh CAVEATS
The Racal Interlan NI5210 comes in variants with 8 and 16 kbytes of
shared memory.
It is strongly advisable to use the 16 kbyte variant.
You can upgrade your 8 kbyte card to 16 kbyte by adding an additional
RAM chip.
