.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 David E. O'Brien
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 19, 1997
.Dt IX 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ix
.Nd
EtherExpress ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ix0 at isa? port 0x300 net irq 10 iomem 0xd0000 iosiz 32768 vector ixintr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the 16-bit Intel EtherExpress Ethernet
card based on the Intel i82586 chip.
.Pp
If the IRQ is autodetected if the kernel configuration file has "irq?" or
doesn't specify an IRQ at all.
.Pp
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ix%d: WARNING: board is configured for IRQ %d, using %d"
The IRQ probed from the EEPROM does not match that specified in the kernel
configuration file.  The IRQ specified in the kernel configuration file will
be used in this case.
.It "ix%d: invalid irq (%d)"
An invalid IRQ was specified.  This is a fatal error.
.It "ix%d: ixstart: Packet length=%d > MTU=%d"
The length of the Ethernet packet read was larger than the maxium transfer
unit allowed.  This message suggests an error in the driver.  It probably
should be concidered fatal and the driver shut down.  Currently this does
not happen though.
.It "ix%d: device timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).  Make sure the network connection in use
is the same one the probe read from the EEPROM.
.El
.Pp
.Sh CAVEATS
The driver will use the IRQ specified in the kernel configuration file
if it does not match the board setting.
The type of network connector used (AUI, BNC, TPE) is probed from the EEPROM.
If this does not match the interface actually in use, timeout errors will
occur.
.Pp
.Sh BUGS
Currently the driver does not support multicast.
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver was written by Rodney W. Grimes.
This manual page was written by David E. O'Brien.
