.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1995 HD Associates, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Christopher G. Demetriou.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software withough specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id: labpc.4,v 1.2.6.2 1997/03/07 03:08:14 mpp Exp $
.\"
.rm ES
.rm EE
.de ES
.Pp
.nf
.in +0.5i
..
.de EE
.in -0.5i
.fi
..
.Dd April 26, 1995
.Dt LABPC 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm labpc
.Nd
National Instruments LABPC and LABPC+ driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device labpc0 at isa? port 260 tty irq 5 vector labpcintr
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This supports the National Instruments LABPC and LABPC+ \fILow-Cost
Multifunction I/O Board\fP.
.Pp
This board provides 8 12 bit A-D input channels, 2 12 bit D-A output
channels, and 3 8 bit digital I/O ports.  It also supports setting
up the National Instruments SCXI bus off the digital I/O ports,
although that software is currently present in an external program
and not as part of the driver.
.Pp
The selection of the input or output device, mode, and channel is
through the minor number:
.ES
The 8 bit minor number format is UUSIDCCC, with
 UU: Board unit.
  S: SCAN bit for scan enable.
  I: INTERVAL for interval support
  D: 1: Digital I/O, 0: Analog I/O
CCC: The channel selector:
     ANALOG:
     input:  channel must be 0 to 7 for AD0 ... AD7
     output: channel must be 0 to 2
             0: D-A 0
             1: D-A 1
             2: Alternate channel 0 then 1

     DIGITAL:
     input:  Channel must be 0 to 2.
     output: Channel must be 0 to 2.
.EE
.Pp
The /dev/MAKEDEV script will make the basic analog and digital
devices if you do "sh MAKEDEV labpcaio" and "sh MAKEDEV labpcdio",
however, it won't make device entries for INTERVAL and SCAN devices.
SCAN devices automatically scan over all channels from the channel
number down to 0 (for example, a SCAN for /dev/ad7 will read channels
AD7 ...  AD0) while the INTERVAL device will wait for an external
signal and then read all the channels from the selected channel
number down to 0 as fast as it can.  This is done by the hardware
and not the driver (other than turning it on); See the \fILabPC+
User's Manual\fP and the source code if this doesn't make sense to
you.
.Pp
The driver supports several general analog I/O ioctl calls.  These
are defined in sys/dataacq.h and are intended to be implemented in
other data acquisition board device drivers.
.Pp
AD_MICRO_PERIOD_SET takes a pointer to a long argument specifying
the number of microseconds between samples.
.Pp
AD_MICRO_PERIOD_GET takes a pointer to a long argument and returns
the current number of microseconds between samples.
.Pp
AD_NGAINS_GET takes a pointer to an integer and returns the number
of different gain settings the board supports.  This is 8 for the
LabPC board.
.Pp
AD_NCHANS_GET takes a pointer to an integer and returns the number
of channels the board supports.  This is 8 for the LabPC board.
.Pp
AD_SUPPORTED_GAINS returns an array of NGAINS (the number obtained
by AD_NGAINS_GET) doubles.  These are the gains the board supports.
.Pp
AD_GAINS_SET takes an array of NCHANS (the number obtained by
AD_NCHANS_GET) integers and sets the board gains.  These are indices
into the supported gain array, with one gain for each channel.
.Pp
AD_GAINS_GET takes an array of NCHANS (returned by AD_NCHANS_GET)
integers and returns the current board gains.
.Sh BUGS
In general, only those capabilities that I needed are present.  In
particular the following notable restrictions are present.
.Pp
The analog input is only supported in a clocked conversion mode.
.Pp
You can only set the sample clock down to 15 Hz.  Anything slower
needs a modification to the driver to support TCINTEN in order to
chain together the counters to get a lower clock rate.
.Pp
There is no support for clocked D-A output.
.Pp
The 8255 providing the digital I/O ports  is supported only in mode
0 (three 8 bit ports).
.Pp
There is support for the SCXI bus off the LABPC board.  It is not
in the driver but is a separate user process that accesses the
digital I/O devices.  Ask dufault@hda.com for it.
.Pp
MAKEDEV only makes the "basic" devices.  You must make the INTERVAL
or SCAN devices by hand.
.Pp
The INTERVAL device sets the clock rate as high as possible so that
it samples all the channels as quickly as it can after the external
signal.  This is a silly restriction; it should simply use the
clock setting.
.Sh CAVEATS
National Instrument's (like most other laboratory grade board
vendors) definition of Low-Cost differs dramatically from many on
the net.
