.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 David E. O'Brien
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 13, 2004
.Dt LNC 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lnc
.Nd AMD Lance/PCnet Ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device lnc"
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.lnc.0.at="isa"
.Cd hint.lnc.0.port="0x280"
.Cd hint.lnc.0.irq="10"
.Cd hint.lnc.0.drq="0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the AMD family of Lance/PCnet Ethernet NICs
including the Am7990 and Am79C960.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Novell NE2100
.It
Novell NE32-VL
.It
Isolan AT 4141-0 (16 bit)
.It
Isolan BICC
.It
Isolink 4110 (8 bit)
.It
Diamond HomeFree
.It
Digital DEPCA
.It
Hewlett Packard Vectra 486/66XM
.It
Hewlett Packard Vectra XU
.El
.Pp
Also supported are adapters working with the
.Xr pcn 4
driver.
The
.Nm
driver runs these in compatibility mode, thus the
.Xr pcn 4
driver should be preferred.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "lnc%d: Framing error"
A framing error occurred.
This means a CRC error also occurred.
This caused the driver to drop the packet that contained the framing error.
.It "lnc%d: Receive CRC error
The received Ethernet frame failed the CRC checksum.
This caused the driver to drop the packet that failed the checksum.
.It "lnc%d: Packet dropped, no mbufs"
The driver ran out of mbuf's.
This may suggest a resource problem.
.It "lnc%d: Couldn't allocate memory for NIC"
This is a fatal error.
The driver will not attach to the card under this
circumstance.
.It "lnc%d: Memory allocated above 16Mb limit"
ISA and ESIA cards require bounce buffers for DMA transfers above 16mb.
The Am7990 and Am79C960 only have 24 address lines and so can only access
the lower 16Mb of physical memory.
The
.Nm
driver assumes the memory it allocates is within the lower 16Mb range.
This is not a very valid assumption but there's nothing that can be done
about it yet.
For shared memory NICs this is not relevant.
.It "lnc%d: Device timeout -- Resetting"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
Make sure the network connection in use
is the same one the card is configured for.
.It "lnc%d: Transmit late collision  -- Net error?"
.It "lnc%d: Loss of carrier during transmit -- Net error?"
.It "lnc%d: Transmit of packet failed after 16 attempts -- TDR = %d"
.It "lnc%d: Heartbeat error -- SQE test failed"
.It "lnc%d: Babble error - more than 1519 bytes transmitted"
.It "lnc%d: Missed packet -- no receive buffer"
.It "lnc%d: Memory error  -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Couldn't get mbuf for transmit packet -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Receive buffer error"
.It "lnc%d: Receive overflow error"
.It "lnc%d: Receive interrupt with buffer still owned by controller -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Receive interrupt but not start of packet -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Start of packet found before end of previous in receive ring -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: End of received packet not found -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Transmit interrupt with buffer still owned by controller -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Transmit interrupt but not start of packet -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Start of packet found before end of previous in transmit ring -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: End of transmitted packet not found -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Transmit buffer error -- Resetting"
.It "lnc%d: Transmit underflow error -- Resetting"
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Paul Richards .
Support for the AMD PCHome phone-line based network added by
.An Robert Watson .
This manual page was written by
.An David E. O'Brien .
.Sh BUGS
This driver has the potential of being the most verbose of any of the
Ethernet device drivers.
