.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 5, 1998
.Dt MX 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm mx
.Nd
Macronix 98713/98715/98725 fast ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device mx0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI ethernet adapters and embedded
controllers based on the Macronix 98713, 98713A, 98715, 98715A and
98725 fast ethernet controller chips. This includes the NDC
Communications SOHOware SFA110, the SVEC PN102-TX
fast ethernet card, and various other adapters. The
.Nm
driver also supports the Lite-On 82c115 PNIC II chip, which is
actually similar in design to the Macronix 98715A with the addition
of wake on LAN support. Supported PNIC II cards include the
LinkSys LNE100TX Version 2.
.Pp
The Macronix chips use bus master DMA and are designed to be
DEC 'tulip' workalikes. The original 98713 had an MII bus for
controlling an external PHY, however the 98713A and up use an
internal transceiver with NWAY support. The Macronix parts are
advertised as being register compatible with the DEC 21x4x
controllers. All of the Macronix controllers support both
10 and 100Mbps speeds in either full or half duplex.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation. The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex modes.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (fast ethernet) operation. The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
Note that the 100baseTX media type is only available if supported
by the adapter.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "mx%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "mx%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "mx%d: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.It "mx%d: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.It "mx%d: no memory for tx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the transmitter ring when
allocating a pad buffer or collapsing an mbuf chain into a cluster.
.It "mx%d: chip is in D3 power state -- setting to D0"
This message applies only to adapters which support power
management. Some operating systems place the controller in low power
mode when shutting down, and some PCI BIOSes fail to bring the chip
out of this state before configuring it. The controller loses all of
its PCI configuration in the D3 state, so if the BIOS does not set
it back to full power mode in time, it won't be able to configure it
correctly. The driver tries to detect this condition and bring
the adapter back to the D0 (full power) state, but this may not be
enough to return the driver to a fully operational condition. If
you see this message at boot time and the driver fails to attach
the device as a network interface, you will have to perform second
warm boot to have the device properly configured.
.Pp
Note that this condition only occurs when warm booting from another
operating system. If you power down your system prior to booting
.Fx ,
the card should be configured correctly.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 , 
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T Macronix 98713/A, 98715/A and 98725 data sheets
.%O http://www.macronix.com
.Re
.Rs
.%T Macronix 98713/A and 98715/A app notes
.%O http://www.macronix.com
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu .
.Sh BUGS
The Macronix application notes claim that in order to put the
chips in normal operation, the driver must write a certian magic
number into the CSR16 register. The numbers are documented in
the app notes, but the exact meaning of the bits is not.
.Pp
The 98713A seems to have a problem with 10Mbps full duplex mode.
The transmitter works but the receiver tends to produce many
unexplained errors leading to very poor overall performance. The
98715A does not exhibit this problem. All other modes on the
98713A seem to work correctly.
