.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1993 Christopher G. Demetriou
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"      This product includes software developed by Christopher G. Demetriou.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	from: npx.4,v 1.1 1993/08/06 10:58:03 cgd Exp
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 28, 1993
.Dt NPX 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm npx
.Nd Numeric Processing Extension coprocessor and emulator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device npx"
.Cd hint.npx.0.at="nexus"
.Cd hint.npx.0.port="0x0F0"
.Cd hint.npx.0.flags="0x0"
.Cd hint.npx.0.irq="13"
.Pp
For hosts without a FPU coprocessor add:
.Cd "options MATH_EMULATE"
or
.Cd "options GPL_MATH_EMULATE"
.\" XXX this is awful hackery to get it to work right... -- cgd
.\" What the heck does he mean? - cracauer
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver enables the use of the system's Numeric Processing Extension
coprocessor,
if one is present.  Numeric processing extensions are present in
systems with
.Sy 486DX
CPUs and in systems with
.Sy 387
or
.Sy 487SX
coprocessors.  The
.Nm
driver is required for proper system functioning regardless
of whether or not a NPX is present.
.Pp
If there is no NPX present in the system, the MATH_EMULATE or
GPL_MATH_EMULATE option must be defined in the kernel configuration
file.
It will provide support for the instructions normally executed by the
NPX.
If there is no NPX in the system and the kernel is not built with math
emulation, the system will not boot.
.Pp
You can choose to use a much more fully-featured math emulator (under the
GPL license) by including the option GPL_MATH_EMULATE in your kernel
configuration file instead of the MATH_EMULATE option.
.Pp
The
.Sy GENERIC
kernel configuration uses the MATH_EMULATE option.
.Pp
The flags for npx0 are:
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxx -compact
.It 0x01
don't use the npx registers to optimize bcopy.
.It 0x02
don't use the npx registers to optimize bzero.
.It 0x04
don't use the npx registers to optimize copyin or copyout.
.It 0x08
use emulator even if hardware FPU is available.
.El
.Pp
The npx registers are normally used
to optimize copying and zeroing
when all of the following conditions are satisfied:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
I586_CPU is an option
.It
the cpu is an i586 (perhaps not a Pentium)
.It
the probe for npx0 succeeds
.It
INT 16 exception handling works.
.El
Then copying and zeroing
using the npx registers
is normally 30-100% faster.
.Pp
The flags can be used
to control cases
where it doesn't work or is slower.
Setting them at boot time
using userconfig works correctly
(the optimizations are not used
until later in the bootstrap
when npx0 is attached).
Flag 0x08 automatically disables the i586 optimized routines.
.Sh CAVEATS
The emulator is much slower than the NPX coprocessor.
This will result in poor floating-point math performance
if the emulator must be used.
.Pp
The non-GPL emulator does not support the whole set of npx
instructions.
It is sufficient for booting and configuring a system, but it cannot
support a system with normal workload unless care is taken to compile
the whole system (including third-party packages) with compiler
options that avoid the use of the non-emulated instructions.
.Sh BUGS
There are lots of them, especially on old cheap motherboards.
In particular, some motherboards do not have the interrupt lines from
the NPX to the CPU wired properly.
If this is the case, the emulator must be used if consistent system
operation is desired.
.Pp
When using the default MATH_EMULATE option,
transcendental function instructions are not implemented.
Emulation of other instructions is suspect.
