.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2000
.\" Dr. Duncan McLennan Barclay, dmlb@ragnet.demon.co.uk.
.\"
.\"  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY DUNCAN BARCLAY AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL DUNCAN BARCLAY OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 16, 2005
.Dt RAY 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ray
.Nd "Raytheon Raylink/Webgear Aviator PCCard driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile support for the
.Nm
driver into your kernel, place the following line in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ray"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the
.Nm
driver at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ray_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for
.Tn "Raytheon Raylink"
adapters (commonly available as
.Tn "Webgear Aviator" ,
.Tn "Webgear Aviator Pro"
and
.Tn "Raylink PC Card"
devices.)
The core of the
.Tn Raylink
cards is a frequency hopping PHY with an
.Tn IEEE
802.11
style MAC that interacts with the host using shared memory and mailboxes.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver currently supports ad-hoc operation mode and the
.Tn Aviator
cards.
Infrastructure mode, interworking with
.Tn "Windows 2000" Ns / Ns Tn Linux Ns / Ns Nx ,
.Tn "Raylink PC Cards"
and
.Tn "Aviator Pros"
is rudimentary and in active development.
The
.Nm
driver currently encapsulates all IP and ARP traffic as
.Tn Ethernet
2 frames within an
.Tn IEEE
802.11
frame.
Other translations will be forthcoming as needed.
Transmit speed is
selectable between 0.5Mbps, 1Mbp , 1.5Mbps or 2Mbps all with auto fallback.
.Pp
By default, the
.Nm
driver configures the card for ad-hoc operation.
In this mode,
stations can communicate amongst each other without the aid of an access
point.
To join a managed service set, the driver must be set for infrastructure mode
using the
.Xr raycontrol 8
utility.
.Pp
There are two known firmware versions; version 4 and version 5.
Version 4 firmware was shipped on the orignal
.Tn "Webgear Aviators"
Version 5 firmware is
used as part of the
.Tn "Windows 2000"
upgrade from
.Tn Webgear
and on the
.Tn "Aviator Pro" ,
and
.Tn "Raylink PC Cards"
cards.
Version 4 is not likely to be 100%
.Tn IEEE
802.11
compliant - version 5 should be.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8
and
.Xr raycontrol 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following messages occur when there are problems
setting up the memory mapped buffers due to nits in
.Xr pccardd 8 .
.Bl -diag
.It "ray?: pccardd did not map CM - giving up"
See the
.Sx BUGS
section and contact the author for help enclosing a copy
of the output from
.Xr dmesg 8 .
This message only occurs on 3.x systems.
.It "ray?: fixing up CM ..."
.It "ray?: fixing up AM ..."
The driver is fixing up PCCard memory management after mis-configuration
by
.Xr pccardd 8 ,
benign.
.El
.Pp
.Bl -diag
On 4.x and -current systems the following messages can occur when the
memory mapped buffers are set up.
.It "ray?: allocated common memory:"
.It ".  start 0xd0000 count 0xc0000 flags 0x40"
Benign.
.It "ray?: allocated attribute memory:"
.It ".  start 0xdc000 count 0x1000 flags 0x50"
Benign.
.It "ray?: allocated irq:"
.It ".  start 0x9 count 0x1"
Benign.
.It "ray?: Cannot allocate attribute memory"
.It "ray?: Cannot allocate common memory"
.It "ray?: Cannot allocate irq"
.It "ray?: Failed to setup irq"
.It "ray?: CARD_SET_MEMORY_OFFSET returned 0x??"
.It "ray?: CARD_SET_RES_FLAGS returned 0x??"
See the
.Sx BUGS
section and contact the author for help enclosing a copy
of the output from
.Xr dmesg 8
in your email.
.El
.Pp
.Bl -diag
If the kernel is booted with the verbose flag turned on then the
extra information is printed when the driver is probed.
These messages are also seen when the
.Dv RAY_DBG_BOOTPARAM
bit in the
.Dv RAY_DEBUG
option is turned on, as is the case for all existing
versions of the driver.
.It "ray?: memory start 0x???? count 0x???? flags 0x???? offset 0x????"
Description of memory map settings on entry to the driver.
.It "ray?: irq start 0x???? count 0x????"
Description of irq settings on entry to the driver (only on 4.1 and
above).
.El
.Pp
On start-up the driver will report hardware failures thus:
.Bl -diag
.It "ray?: card failed self test: status 0x??<???>"
The card failed to come ready after it was plugged in to the PCCard
slot.
The most common cause of this message is incorrect PCCard memory
management (indicated by a status of 0xff or 0x55).
Bent cards might say that the receiver calibration failed.
If you are brave enough removing the
base of the case can resurrect cards (no warranties etc.).
.It "ray?: unsupported firmware version 0x??"
Self explanatory.
Contact the author for help enclosing a copy
of the output from
.Xr dmesg 8 .
.El
.Pp
The following messages are enabled using the
.Cm debug
option of
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Bl -diag
.It "ray?: cannot transmit - not running"
A packet was ready for transmission but the NIC is not connected to a
BSS.
May occur when removing the PCCard.
.It "ray?: cannot transmit - no network"
The wireless NIC has roamed from an access point and not connected with a new
one yet.
.It "ray?: cannot transmit - ECF busy"
The controller firmware was busy when a packet was about to be sent out.
It will be retried automatically.
.It "ray?: mbuf too long ??"
Should never happen, and if it does represents something wrong in the
generic Ethernet driver in the kernel.
.It "ray?: could not pullup ether"
Problem with re-aligning mbufs.
Very unlikely to happen.
.It "ray?: unknown framing type ??"
An impossible error - mail the author.
.It "ray?: could not translate packet"
An error occurred when trying to re-frame a packet for transmission.
.It "ray?: ECF busy, dropping packet"
The NIC was busy just before a packet was to be transmitted.
.It "ray?: tx completed but status is fail"
Typically associated with transmissions to out of range NICs.
.It "ray?: packet too big or too small"
A received packet was impossibly small or too large to fit into an mbuf.
.It "ray?: MGETHDR failed"
The driver could not get a mbuf to store a received packet into.
Try increasing
.Dv MAXUSERS
in your kernel configuration.
.It "ray?: MCLGET failed"
The driver could not get a mbuf to store a received packet into.
Try increasing
.Dv MAXUSERS
in your kernel configuration.
.It "ray?: bad length current 0x?? pktlen 0x??"
The lengths of a fragmented packet were inconsistent.
.It "ray?: bad rcs index 0x??"
The index of the buffer used for part of a fragmented packet is
outside of the usable range.
.It "ray?: header not version 0 fc0 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
packet had an unknown header type.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: unknown packet fc0 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
packet type is unknown.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: reserved DATA packet subtype 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
data packet has a reserved (i.e., not allowed) subtype.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: MGT TODS/FROMDS wrong fc1 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
management packet had a malformed header.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: unexpected MGT packet subtype 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
management packet was of a subtype that the NIC
should have processed.
Benign, but might represent buggy firmware.
.It "ray?: reserved MGT packet subtype 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
management packet has a reserved (i.e., not allowed)
subtype.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: open system authentication request"
Self explanatory and for testing
.Tn "Aviator Pro"
interworking.
.It "ray?: authentication failed with status ??"
Self explanatory and currently represents a bug as the driver never
requests authentication.
.It "ray?: shared key authentication request"
Self explanatory and for testing
.Tn "Aviator Pro"
interworking.
.It "ray?: reserved authentication subtype 0x??"
An authentication request has been received for a reserved (i.e., not allowed)
subtype.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: CTL TODS/FROMDS wrong fc1 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
management packet had a malformed header.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: unexpected CTL packet subtype 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
control packet was of a subtype that the NIC
should have processed.
Benign, but might represent buggy firmware.
.It "ray?: reserved CTL packet subtype 0x??"
The received
.Tn IEEE
802.11
control packet has a reserved (i.e., not allowed)
subtype.
Represents link corruption or non standard nodes in the network.
.It "ray?: bad ccs index 0x??"
The NIC has generated an interrupt with an incorrect control block.
.It "ray?: unexpected UPDATE_APM"
.It "ray?: unexpected TEST_MEM"
.It "ray?: unexpected SHUTDOWN"
.It "ray?: unexpected DUMP_MEM"
.It "ray?: unexpected START_TIMER"
The NIC has generated an interrupt signalling that
the indicated command has completed.
At present these commands are never
issued by the driver, so they represent firmware/hardware/driver bugs.
.It "ray?: unknown command 0x??"
The NIC has generated an interrupt for an unknown command completion.
Represents firmware/hardware/driver bugs.
.It "ray?: unexpected JAPAN_CALL_SIGNAL"
The NIC has generated an interrupt with a control block requesting
processing of a packet that is only ever used in Japanese RCR
certification tests.
Represents firmware/hardware/driver bugs unless you
are trying to certify the NICs in Japan (in which case you would have to
of modified the driver and this manual is out of date).
.It "ray?: spinning"
The controller firmware was busy when a command was about to be issued.
If the driver spins for too long then it will panic.
See the
.Sx BUGS
section for details.
.It "ray?: freeing free ccs 0x??"
Benign warning that may occur when the NIC is ejected.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr pccardd 8 ,
.Xr raycontrol 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
Early versions of this
.Nm
driver were a port of the
.Nx
driver by
.An "Christian E. Hopps" .
The driver
was re-structured by
.An Duncan Barclay Aq dmlb@FreeBSD.org ,
so that
.Xr dhclient 8
would work.
.Sh BUGS
Infra-structure mode is not supported yet.
The driver is likely to panic if it is set into this mode.
Testers are encouraged to contact the
author.
.Pp
Currently
.Fx
has a small problem managing and setting up the correct memory maps.
However, this driver should reset the
memory maps correctly - it works around
.Xr pccardd 8
(where it reads the CIS for common memory, sets it all up
and then throws it all away assuming the card is an
.Xr ed 4
driver...).
Note that this could be dangerous (because it does not interact with
.Xr pccardd 8 )
if you use other memory mapped cards at the same time or have
SCSI cards with on-board BIOS.
.Pp
More encapsulations and translations could be supported, but they have
little value unless someone can demonstrate that the
.Nm
cards will communicate with other manufacturers cards.
Version 4 and
firmware is not
.Tn IEEE
802.11
compliant, but version 5 is.
.Pp
To communicate with
.Tn Windows
machines ensure that the
.Tn Windows
machine
creates the BSS/IBSS.
.Pp
The driver currently panics on some errors that it should recover from.
These will be removed RSN.
