.\" Written by Denis I. Timofeev, 2002.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 8, 2002
.Dt SBNI 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm sbni
.Nd Granch SBNI12 leased line modem driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device sbni0 at isa? port 0x210 irq 5"
.Cd "device sbni1 at isa? port 0x2c0 irq 11 flags 0xe9123456"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm sbni
driver provides support for leased line modems of following models:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Pa SBNI12-02, SBNI12D-02
.It Pa SBNI12-04, SBNI12D-04
.It Pa SBNI12-05, SBNI12D-05, ISA and PCI
.It Pa SBNI12-10, SBNI12D-10, ISA and PCI
.El
.Pp
and a kit for data link over a voice band
SBNI12-11, SBNI12D-11,	ISA and PCI.
.Pp
In addition to the standard port and irq specifications, the
.Nm
driver also supports a number of
.Em flags
which can set baud rate, receive level, and low three bytes of Ethernet
MAC-address (high three always are 00:ff:01), because Granch modems is
presented to the system as Ethernet-like netcards.
.Pp
The high byte of the
.Em flags
is a bit field, it's used to specify SBNI adapter receive level/baud rate:
.Bd -literal
	Bits 0-3: receive level (0x00..0x0f)
	Bits 4-5: baud rate number:
			00 - 0 baud rate (2Mb in fast mode/500kb in slow)
			01 - 1 baud rate (1Mb/250kb)
			10 - 2 baud rate (500kb/125kb)
			11 - 3 baud rate (250kb/62.5kb)
	Bit 6   : use fixed receive level
		  if bit 6 is set then receive level will be set according
		  to bits 0-3 value, otherwise receive level will be
		  autodetected
	Bit 7   : use fixed baud rate
		  if bit 7 is set then baud rate will be set according to
		  bits 4-5 value, otherwise baud rate is set to 2Mb

E.g.:
device sbni0 at isa? port 0x210 irq 5 flags 0xefdead
	- baud rate 2 Mb (default), receive level autodetected,
	  MAC address will be 00:ff:01:ef:de:ad

device sbni1 at isa? port 0x214 irq 7 flags 0xd6abcdef
	- baud rate 1 Mb, receive level 0x06 (fixed),
	  MAC address 00:ff:01:ab:cd:ef
.Sh FILES
The sources for the driver reside in:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Pa /sys/dev/sbni/if_sbni.c
.It Pa /sys/dev/sbni/if_sbnireg.h
.It Pa /sys/dev/sbni/if_sbnivar.h
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm sbni
device driver for FreeBSD 4.x was written by Denis I. Timofeev, partially
based on David Greenman's
.Nm ed
driver. Earlier versions (available on ftp.granch.com) were written by
Alexey V. Zverev.
.Pp
SBNI12 hardware was designed by Alexey V. Chirkov.
