.\"Manual pages for FreeBSD Seagate ST01/02, Future Domain TMC-885,
.\"TMC-950 SCSI driver.
.\"
.\"Copyright 1994, Serge Vakulenko (vak@cronyx.ru)
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use of this document, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided redistributions must retain
.\"the above copyright notice and this condition.
.\"
.\"	$Id: sea.4,v 1.3.2.1 1997/02/28 03:27:06 mpp Exp $
.Dd December 25, 1994
.Dt SEA 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm sea
.Nd
Seagate ST01/ST02, Future Domain TMC-885, TMC-950 SCSI adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
With explicit memory and IRQ parameters:
.Cd "controller sea0 at isa? bio irq 5 iomem 0xc8000 vector seaintr
.Pp
With automatic memory address detection and no IRQ:
.Cd "controller sea0 at isa?
.Pp
.Cd "controller scbus0
.Pp
For each connected disk:
.Cd "device sd0
.Pp
For each connected tape device:
.Cd "device st0
.Pp
For one or more cdroms:
.Cd "device cd0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides access to SCSI devices connected to Seagate ST01/ST02 or
Future Domain TMC-885, TMC-950 SCSI adapter.
.Pp
It's possible to use the Seagate ST01/ST02 adapter without IRQ line.
The data rate then slightly decreases (by 20-30%).
.Pp
The \fBflags\fP keyword in the configuration file can be used to set
some adapter driver parameters:
.Pp
Bits    Description
.br
------------------------------------------
.br
0x01    Disable SCSI bus parity check.
.Pp
The original Seagate ST02
BIOS cannot coexist with IDE or any other disk controller
because it does not share BIOS disk drive numbers (80h, 81h)
with others.  The probing code  of the driver allows using ST02 controller
without BIOS: just unplug the ST02 BIOS chip from the board.
.Pp
Another problem is the floppy adapter on ST02 which could not be
disabled by jumpers.  The ST02 adapter it the best as a cheap solution
for attaching the tape and CD-ROM drives, and an extra floppy controller
is just a headache.  There exist a simple workaround: cutting off
the AEN signal (A11 contact on ISA connector).  AEN then goes high and
disables the floppy adapter port address decoder.
.Pp
Some motherboards also have a problem with ST02 conflicting with IDE during
IDE data write phase.  It seems than ST02 makes some noise
on /IOW line.  The /IOW line is used only for floppy controller
part of ST02, and because it's rarely needed, cutting off the /IOW
(contact B13) will help.
.Pp
Tested on the following hardware:
.br
  Adapter: Seagate ST02
.br
     Disk: HP D1686
.br
Streamers: Archive Viper 150, Wangtek 5525
.br
  CD-ROMs: Toshiba XM-3401, NEC CDR-25
.Pp
Maximum data rate is about 270-280 kbytes/sec (on 386DX/40).
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Pa -compact
.It Pa /sys/i386/isa/seagate.c
driver source
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4
