.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 4, 2004
.Dt SNC 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snc
.Nd National Semiconductor DP8393X SONIC Ethernet adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device isa
.Cd device snc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn National
.Tn Semiconductor
.Tn SONIC
Ethernet adapters.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following cards:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
National Semiconductor DP83934AVQB
.It
NEC PC-9801-83
.It
NEC PC-9801-84
.It
NEC PC-9801-103
.It
NEC PC-9801-104
.It
NEC PC-9801N-15
.It
NEC PC-9801N-25
.It
NEC PC-9801N-J02 PCMCIA
.It
NEC PC-9801N-J02R PCMCIA
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver also includes support for the
.Tn National
.Tn Semiconductor
.Tn NS46C46
as
64 * 16 bits Microwave Serial
.Tn EEPROM .
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Accessing
.Tn SONIC
card data structures and registers as 32 bit values
makes code endianness independent.
The
.Tn SONIC
is however always in big-endian mode so it is necessary to
ensure that data structures shared
between the
.Tn CPU
and the
.Tn SONIC
card are always in big-endian order.
The
.Nm
driver supports the
.Tn PC-98
C-Bus,
and
.Tn PnP
buses.
Support is also provided for the legacy C-Bus.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following driver specific error messages
may be reported:
.Bl -diag
.It "snc%d: snc_nec16_register_irq: unsupported irq (%d)"
The card returned an
.Tn IRQ
which is not supported by the driver.
.It "snc%d: invalid packet length %d bytes"
An attempt to transfer a data packet failed due to an
invalid packet length.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr bus_alloc_resource_any 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver was ported from
.Nx
by
.An -nosplit
.An Motomichi Matsuzaki Aq Mt mzaki@e-mail.ne.jp
and
.An Hiroshi Yamashita Aq Mt bluemoon@msj.biglobe.ne.jp .
It first appeared in
.Fx 4.2 .
This manual page first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
Currently the
.Nm
driver only works on the
.Tn PC-98
architecture.
It should probably work on the i386 architecture
as well.
