.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 John Hay.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"        This product includes software developed by John Hay.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY John Hay ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL John Hay BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 4, 1996
.Dt SR 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sr
.Nd synchronous RISCom/N2 / WANic 400/405 device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device sr"
.Pp
For ISA cards, in
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.sr.0.at="isa"
.Cd hint.sr.0.port="0x300"
.Cd hint.sr.0.irq="10"
.Cd hint.sr.0.maddr="0xd0000"
.Cd hint.sr.0.flags="0x0"
.Pp
.Cd "device sppp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the RISCom/N2 ISA cards and the WANic 400/405 PCI cards
that is based on the HD64570 chip.
.Pp
If you have ISA cards, you need to specify the resources for them in
.Pa /boot/device.hints .
If you have the second ISA card, add
.Pp
.Dl hint.sr.1.at="isa"
.Dl hint.sr.1.port="0x310"
.Dl hint.sr.1.irq="11"
.Dl hint.sr.1.maddr="0xd0000"
.Dl hint.sr.1.flags="0x0"
.Pp
The standard
.Fx
sppp code is used for the link level layer.
The
default protocol used is PPP.
The Cisco HDLC protocol can be used by
adding
.Em link2
to
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
Alternately, the driver can be compiled to support
.Xr netgraph 4
(see below).
.Pp
The
.Em flags
specification in
.Pa /boot/device.hints
is optional.
If it isn't specified, the driver will
assume the following:
.Pp
.Bl -hang -offset indent
.It "The card has 2 ports."
.It "The clock for the serial ports is external and the transmitter uses"
the same clock as the receiver.
.El
.Pp
The
.Em flags
are a bit field and can be used to force a different
behaviour than the default.
.Pp
.Bl -hang -offset indent
.It Em 0x01
The card has only one port.
.It Em 0x10
Use separate external clocks for transmit and receive on port 0.
.It Em 0x40
Use separate external clocks for transmit and receive on port 1.
.El
.Pp
The card only supports IRQ 3, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12 and 15.
.Pp
The iomem area is a 16Kb block and must start at a 16Kb boundary.
.Sh NETGRAPH SUPPORT
If the kernel is compiled with
.Dv "options NETGRAPH"
then the sppp and Cisco HDLC modes are disabled (and the sppp driver
is unneeded), and this driver functions as a
.Xr netgraph 4
node with a single hook named
.Dv rawdata .
Connecting to this hook enables the transmission of raw HDLC frames.
The node will have the same name as the device with ``sync_''
prepended, e.g.,
.Dv sync_sr0 .
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /sys/i386/isa/ic/hd64570.h -compact
.It Pa /sys/i386/isa/ic/hd64570.h
.It Pa /sys/i386/isa/if_srregs.h
.It Pa /sys/i386/isa/if_sr.c
.It Pa /sys/i386/isa/if_sr.h
.It Pa /sys/pci/if_sr_p.c
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "sr%d: Warning illegal interrupt %d."
The card cannot use the specified interrupt.
Choose a different one.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ar 4 ,
.Xr cx 4 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An John Hay Aq jhay@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
Netgraph support was added by
.An Julian Elischer Aq julian@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
At the moment only the X.21 interface is tested.
The others
may need tweaks to the clock selection code.
.Pp
The code can probably stand some optimizing.
