.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Mark Newton
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 17, 2008
.Dt STREAMS 4 i386
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm streams
.Nd System V STREAMS networking ABI support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile support for this ABI into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device streams"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the ABI as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
streams_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module provides limited
System V Release 4 STREAMS interprocess communication ABI
(application binary interface) compatibility
for userland applications.
.Pp
Internally,
.Nm
provides STREAMS handles by using socket creation kernel routines, and
adding state-tracking information to the socket to permit manipulation
by STREAMS emulation code in
.Xr svr4 4 .
Hence, opening a stream device produces a result similar to what would be
obtained by calling
.Xr socket 2 .
.Pp
Applications should never use this interface directly: STREAMS
emulation is only provided as a service to support ABI requirements in
the SVR4 environment which
.Xr svr4 4
needs to present to client binaries.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr svr4 4
.Sh HISTORY
System V Release 4 ABI support first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
The ABI was ported from an equivalent facility present in
.Nx 1.3
written by Christos Zoulas.
.Sh BUGS
This whole interface is a crude hack to produce STREAMS semantics
through emulation over sockets.
.Pp
Programmers who hope to be able to use this interface to provide
SVR4 STREAMS services to
.Bx
applications will be sorely disappointed.
