.\"
.\"  Device driver optimized for the Symbios/LSI 53C896/53C895A/53C1010
.\"  PCI-SCSI controllers.
.\"
.\"  Copyright (C) 1999-2000  Gerard Roudier <groudier@club-internet.fr>
.\"
.\"  This driver also supports the following Symbios/LSI PCI-SCSI chips:
.\"	53C810A, 53C825A, 53C860, 53C875, 53C876, 53C885, 53C895.
.\"
.\"  but does not support earlier chips as the following ones:
.\"	53C810, 53C815, 53C825.
.\"
.\"  This driver for FreeBSD-CAM is derived from the Linux sym53c8xx driver.
.\"  Copyright (C) 1998-1999  Gerard Roudier
.\"
.\"  The sym53c8xx driver is derived from the ncr53c8xx driver that had been
.\"  a port of the FreeBSD ncr driver to Linux-1.2.13.
.\"
.\"  The original ncr driver has been written for 386bsd and FreeBSD by
.\"          Wolfgang Stanglmeier        <wolf@cologne.de>
.\"          Stefan Esser                <se@mi.Uni-Koeln.de>
.\"  Copyright (C) 1994  Wolfgang Stanglmeier
.\"
.\"  The initialization code, and part of the code that addresses
.\"  FreeBSD-CAM services is based on the aic7xxx driver for FreeBSD-CAM
.\"  written by Justin T. Gibbs.
.\"
.\"  Other major contributions:
.\"
.\"  NVRAM detection and reading.
.\"  Copyright (C) 1997 Richard Waltham <dormouse@farsrobt.demon.co.uk>
.\"
.\" ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 12, 2000
.Dt SYM 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm sym
.Nd Symbios/LSI Logic PCI-SCSI host adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For any number of cards:
.Cd device sym0
.Pp
To disable PCI parity checking (needed for broken bridges)
.Cd options SYM_SETUP_PCI_PARITY=<boolean>
.Pp
To control driver probing against HVD buses
.Cd options SYM_SETUP_SCSI_DIFF=<bit combination>
.Pp
To control chip attachment balancing between the ncr driver and this driver
.Cd options SYM_SETUP_LP_PROBE_MAP=<bit combination>
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides support for the Symbios/LSI Logic
.Tn 53C810A,
.Tn 53C825A,
.Tn 53C860,
.Tn 53C875,
.Tn 53C876,
.Tn 53C895,
.Tn 53C895A,
.Tn 53C896,
.Tn 53C897,
.Tn 53C1510D,
and
.Tn 53C1010
PCI-SCSI controllers.
.Pp
Driver features include support for wide SCSI busses, fast10, fast20,
fast40 and fast80-dt synchronous data transfers depending on controller
capabilities. It also provides generic SCSI features as tagged command
queuing and auto-request sense. This driver is configured by default
for a maximum of 446 outstanding commands per bus, 8 LUNs per target
and 64 tagged tasks per LUN. These numbers are not so limited by design,
as have been considered reasonable values for current SCSI technology.
These values can be increased by changing appropriate
constants in driver header files (not recommended).
.Pp
This driver requires the PCI-SCSI chip to implement LOAD/STORE SCRIPTS
instructions and therefore it does not provide support for 53C810 revid < 16,
53C825 revid < 16 and all 53C815 revisions. The generic
.Nm ncr
driver can be used to support these early chips.
.Pp
By default, when both the
.Nm ncr
and
.Nm
drivers are configured, the
.Nm
driver takes precedence over the
.Nm ncr
driver for all chips that are supported by
both drivers. As result, the
.Nm ncr
driver does only attach the 53C8XX
chips that donnot support LOAD/STORE (i.e.: 53C810, 53C815 and 53C825).
User can change the balancing of chip types between drivers by defining
the
.Ar SYM_SETUP_LP_PROBE_MAP
kernel configuration option as follows:
.Bl -column "Bit   " "53C8XXA, 53C8XX, 53C8XX, 53C8XX, 53C8XX, 53C8XX"
.Em Bit	Devices attached by ncr instead
1	53C810a, 53C860
2	53C825a, 53C875, 53C876, 53C885, 53C895
4	53C895a, 53C896, 53C897, 53C1510d
.El
.Ed
.Pp
For example, if
.Ar SYM_SETUP_LP_PROBE_MAP
is supplied with value 7, all the
above chips will be attached by the
.Nm ncr
driver and the
.Nm
driver will only
attach the 53C1010 Ultra-3 controllers.
.Pp
HVD/LVD capable controllers (895, 895A, 896, 897 and 1010) report
the actual bus mode from the STEST4 chip IO registers. This feature
allows to safely probe against bus mode and to set up the chip
accordingly. By default the driver only supports HVD for these chips.
For other chips that can support HVD but not LVD, the driver has to probe
implementation dependent registers (GPIO) in order to detect HVD bus mode.
Only HVD implementations that conform with Symbios Logic recommendation can
be detected by the driver. When the
.Ar SYM_SETUP_SCSI_DIFF
kernel is provided
as value 1, the driver will also probe against HVD for 825a, 875, 876 and
885 chips, assuming Symbios Logic compatible implementation of HVD.
.Pp
When supplied as 0, the
.Ar SYM_SETUP_PCI_PARITY
kernel configuration option
indicates the driver not to enable PCI parity checking. PCI parity
checking should not be an option for PCI-SCSI controllers, but some
systems have been reported to fail using 53C8XX chips due to spurious or
permanent PCI parity errors detected. This option is supplied for
convenience but it is not recommended nor supported.
.Pp
This driver offers other options that are not currently exported to user.
They are defined and documented in the sym_conf.h driver file. It is not
recommended to change these options unless absolute need. Some of these
options are planned to be exported through SYSCTL or equivalent mechanism
in a further driver release and therefore, no compatibility is guaranteed.
.Pp
At initialization, the driver tries to detect and read user settings from
controller NVRAM. The Symbios/Logic NVRAM layout and the Tekram NVRAM
layout are currently supported. If the reading of the NVRAM succeeds, the
following settings are taken into account and reported to CAM:
.Pp
.Bl -column "SCSI parity checking      " "Symbios     " "Tekram"
.Em Host settings	Symbios	Tekram
SCSI parity checking	Y	N
Host SCSI ident 	Y	Y
Verbose messages	Y	N
Scan targets hi-lo	Y	N
Avoid SCSI bus reset	Y	N
.Pp
.El
.Bl -column "Synchronous period       " "Symbios     " "Tekram"
.Em Device settings	Symbios	Tekram
Synchronous period	Y	Y
SCSI bus width  	Y	Y
Queue tag enable	Y	Y
Number of tags  	NA	Y
Disconnect enable	Y	Y
Scan at boot time	Y	N
Scan LUN       	Y	N
.El
.Pp
Devices that are configured as disabled for 'scan' in the NVRAM are not
reported to CAM at system start-up. They can be discovered later using
the
.Nm camcontrol rescan
command.
.Pp
The table below summarizes the main features and capabilities of the
NCR/Symbios/LSI Logic 53C8XX family of PCI-SCSI controllers.
.Pp
.Bl -column sym53c1510d "Sync   " "Width  " "SRAM  " "PCI64"
.Em Chip	Sync	Width	SRAM	PCI64	Supported
sym53c810	10MHz	8Bit	N	N	N
sym53c810a	10MHz	8Bit	N	N	Y
sym53c815	10MHz	8Bit	N	N	N
sym53c825	10MHz	16Bit	N	N	N
sym53c825a	10MHz	16Bit	4KB	N	Y
sym53c860	20MHz	8Bit	N	N	Y
sym53c875	20MHz	16Bit	4KB	N	Y
sym53c876	20MHz	16Bit	4KB	N	Y
sym53c885	20MHz	16Bit	4KB	N	Y
sym53c895	40MHz	16Bit	4KB	N	Y
sym53c895A	40MHz	16Bit	8KB	N	Y
sym53c896	40MHz	16Bit	8KB	Y	Y
sym53c897	40MHz	16Bit	8KB	Y	Y
sym53c1510D	40MHz	16Bit	4KB	Y	Y
sym53c1010	80MHz	16Bit	8KB	Y	Y
.El
.Pp
.Sh BUGS
No known bugs.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr ncr 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver has been written by Gerard Roudier and is derived from the
Linux sym53c8xx driver from the same author.
The sym53c8xx driver is derived from the ncr53c8xx driver that had been
a port of the
.Fx
.Nm ncr
driver to Linux-1.2.13.
The original
.Nm ncr
driver was written for 386BSD and
.Fx
by Wolfgang Stanglmeier and Stefan Esser.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .

