.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Junichi Satoh
.\"   All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY FreeBSD, Inc. AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS''
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL FreeBSD, Inc.  OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$Id: wfd.4,v 1.2 1998/03/12 07:30:39 charnier Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 16, 1998
.Dt WFD 4
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm wfd
.Nd ATAPI floppy driver (LS-120 floppy driver)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd options ATAPI
.Cd options ATAPI_STATIC
.Cd device wfd0
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for
.Em ATAPI
floppy disks, typically LS-120 style 120mb/1.4mb floppy drives.
In general the interfaces are similar to those described by 
.Xr wd 4
.Xr sd 4
and
.Xr od 4 .
.Pp
As the IDE controllers are probed during boot, the 
.Em IDE
buses are scanned for devices. Any devices found which answered as
.Sq Em Floppy
and
.Sq Em removable
type device will be attached to the 
.Nm
driver.
The first device found will be attached as
.Em wfd0
and the next, 
.Em wfd0 ,
and so on.
.Pp
When used with a LS-120 drive, this driver will read/write the following
types of floppy disk:
.Bl -tag -width 1.25MB -compact
.It 120mb
.It 1.44mb
.It 1.25mb (PC-9801 series format)
.It 1.2mb
.It 720kb
.El
.Sh PARTITIONING
The 
.Nm
driver allows the disk to have two levels of partitioning.
One layer, called the
.Dq slice layer ,
is used to separate the
.Tn FreeBSD
areas of the disk from areas used by other operating systems.
The second layer is the native
.Bx 4.4
partitioning scheme,
.Xr disklabel 5 ,
which is used to subdivide the
.Tn FreeBSD
slices into areas for individual filesystems.
For more information, see
.Xr fdisk 8
and
.Xr disklabel 8 ,
respectively.
.Pp
If an uninitialized disk is opened, the slice table will be
initialized with a fictitious
.Tn FreeBSD
slice spanning the entire disk.  Similarly, if an uninitialized
(or
.No non- Ns Tn FreeBSD )
slice is opened, its disklabel will be initialized with parameters
returned by the drive and a single
.Sq Li c
partition encompassing the entire slice.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Making LS-120/ZIP disks can be a bit more complicated than usual depending
upon whether or not you chose to use the slice code or not.
LS-120 floppies are typically considered floppy devices and do not carry
a slice table.  On the other hand, Zip disks, which use the same driver,
are considered hard disks by the vendor, so for compatibility, you should
use a slice table.
.Pp
The driver will handle either type of disk with or without a slice
table,  but for compatibility, you should generally create disks
that follow the vendor's behavior.
.Pp
To create a UFS LS-120 disk (no slice table),
First, make sure there is no slice table on the disk):
.Dl # dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/wfd0 count=16

Next, disklabel the disk:
.Dl # disklabel -rw wfd0 fd120m

Then newfs as usual:
.Dl # newfs /dev/rfd0a
.Fi

To create a standard 1.44mb floppy in a LS-120 drive, do the same
procedure, but use
.Ar fd1440
as the disk layout when using the
.Nm disklabel
command.

.Sh KERNEL CONFIGURATION
Only one
.Nm
device is necessary in the config file; data structures are dynamically
allocated as disks are found on the
.Tn IDE
buses.
.Sh NOTES
This driver is attached to the
.Xr wdc 4
IDE/ATAPI disk controller driver.  It will not work unless
IDE controllers have been configured and enabled in the kernel.
.Sh BUGS
Floppy formatting is not yet supported.
.Pp
This driver is still a beta version.
If you have problems, please report them to <bugs@freebsd.org>
and the author.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/rwfdXXXXX -compact
.It Pa /dev/rwfd Ns Ar u
raw mode
.Tn ATAPI
floppy
.Ar u ,
accessed as an unpartitioned device
.Sm off
.It Pa /dev/wfd Ar u Pa s Ar n
.Sm on
block mode
.Tn ATAPI
floppy disk unit
.Ar u ,
slice
.Ar n ,
accessed as an unpartitioned device
.Sm off
.It Pa /dev/rwfd Ar u Pa s Ar n
.Sm on
raw mode
.Tn ATAPI
floppy disk unit
.Ar u ,
slice
.ar n ,
accessed as an unpartitioned device
.It Pa /dev/wfd Ns Ar u Ns Ar p
block mode
.Tn ATAPI
floppy disk unit
.Ar u ,
first
.Tn FreeBSD
slice, partition
.Ar p
.It Pa /dev/rwfd Ns Ar u Ns Ar p
raw mode
.Tn ATAPI
floppy disk unit
.Ar u ,
first
.Tn FreeBSD
slice, partition
.Ar p
.Sm off
.It Xo
.Pa /dev/wfd Ar u Pa s Ar n Ar p
.Xc
.Sm on
block mode
.Tn ATAPI
floppy disk unit
.Ar u ,
.No Ar n Ns th
slice, partition
.Ar p
.Sm off
.It Xo
.Pa /dev/rwfd Ar u Pa s Ar n Ar p
.Xc
raw mode
.Tn ATAPI
floppy disk unit
.Ar u ,
.No Ar n Ns th
slice, partition
.Ar p
.Sm off
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fdisk 1 ,
.Xr wd 4 ,
.Xr wcd 4 ,
.Xr disklabel 5 ,
.Xr disklabel 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Junichi\ Satoh\  Aq junichi@jp.FreeBSD.org
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2.6 .
