.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 David E. O'Brien
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id: ze.4,v 1.4 1997/03/21 20:14:00 mpp Exp $
.\"
.Dd January 19, 1997
.Dt ZE 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ze
.Nd
IBM/National Semiconductor PCMCIA Ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ze0 at isa? port 0x300 net irq 5 iomem 0xd8000 vector zeintr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the IBM/National Semiconductor based PCMCIA
Ethernet controller.  This includes the IBM Credit Card Adapter I and II 
for the IBM Thinkpad, and the National `InfoMover' NE4100 PCMCIA card.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver is based on the device driver for National Semiconductor DS8390
Ethernet adapter.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ze%d: device timeout, isr=%02x, imr=%02x, imask=%04x"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.It "ze%d: shared memory corrupt - invalid packet length %d"
This error is sometimes seen on early revisions of the Ethernet driver chip
under high load -- the byte order of the length gets switched.
.El
.Sh CAVEATS
This driver is only known to work with IBM Credit Card Adapter for Ethernet,
but could probably work with other PCMCIA cards also, if it were modified
to get the locations of the PCMCIA configuration option register (COR)
by parsing the configuration tuples, rather than by hard-coding in
the value expected by IBM's card.
.Sh BUGS
Currently the driver does not support multicast.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 1.1.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver was written by
.An Keith Moore .
It is based on work originally by
.An David Greenman ,
where Keith made PCMCIA modifications and additions.
It was adapted for
.Fx 1.1.5
by
.An Jordan Hubbard .
This manual page was written by
.An David E. O'Brien .
