.TH dvmstat 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
dvmstat \- vmstat by PID/name/command. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dvmstat
{ \-p PID | \-n name | command }
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program provides vmstat like data for one particular PID, a
process name, or when running a command. It prints statistics
every second.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
stable - needs the vminfo provider.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-p PID
examine this Process ID
.TP
\-n name
examine processes with this name
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
examine PID 1871,
# 
.B dvmstat
\-p 1871
.TP
examine processes called "tar",
#
.B dvmstat
\-n tar
.TP
run and examine "df -h",
#
.B dvmstat
df -h
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
re
page reclaims, Kbytes
.TP
maj
major faults, Kbytes
.TP
mf
minor faults, Kbytes
.TP
fr
page frees, Kbytes
.TP
epi
executable page ins, Kbytes
.TP
epo
executable page outs, Kbytes
.TP
api
anonymous page ins, Kbytes
.TP
apo
anonymous page outs, Kbytes
.TP
fpi
filesystem page ins, Kbytes
.TP
fpo
filesystem page outs, Kbytes
.TP
sy
system calls, number
.PP
.SH NOTES
Most of the statistics are in units of kilobytes, unlike the
original vmstat command which sometimes uses pages.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
dvmstat will run until Ctrl\-C is hit, or the command it is
examining ends.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M), vmstat(1M)
