.TH errinfo 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
errinfo \- print errno for syscall fails. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B errinfo
[\-a|\-A|\-hsvZ] [\-c command]
.SH DESCRIPTION
errinfo snoops syscall failures and prints the errno value and
description of the error number.

This program can help determine if applications are silently
failing, providing some details on the cause. 

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
stable - needs the syscall provider.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-c
counts - print an aggregate style report containing a 
frequency count of errors
.TP
\-p PID
examine this PID only
.TP
\-n name
examine processes with ths name only (eg, "ls")
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output, print errors as they occur,
# 
.B errinfo
.PP
.TP
Print a frequency count report,
# 
.B errinfo
\-c 
.PP
.TP
Snoop errors as they occur for "ssh" processes,
#
.B errinfo
\-n ssh
PP
.TP
Snoop errors for PID 81 only,
#
.B errinfo
\-p 81
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
EXEC
Program name (truncated)
.TP
SYSCALL
System call name
.TP
ERR
Value of errno
.TP
DESC
Description of errno message
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
errinfo will run forever until Ctrl\-C is hit. 
.SH FILES
.TP
/usr/include/sys/errno.h
Contains the full descriptions for the error numbers.
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M), truss(1)

