.TH filebyproc.d 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
filebyproc.d \- snoop opens by process name. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B filebyproc.d
.SH DESCRIPTION
filebyproc.d is a DTrace OneLiner to print file pathnames as they are
opened, including the name of the process calling the open.
A line will be printed regardless of whether the open is actually
successful or not.

This is useful to learn which files applications are attempting to
open, such as config files, database files, log files, etc.

Docs/oneliners.txt and Docs/Examples/oneliners_examples.txt
in the DTraceToolkit contain this as a oneliner that can be cut-n-paste
to run.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
stable - needs the syscall provider.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
This prints new process name and pathnames until Ctrl\-C is hit.
# 
.B filebyproc.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
CPU
The CPU that recieved the event
.TP
ID
A DTrace probe ID for the event
.TP
FUNCTION:NAME
The DTrace probe name for the event
.TP
remaining fields
The first is the name of the process, the second is the file pathname.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
filebyproc.d will run forever until Ctrl\-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
opensnoop(1M), dtrace(1M), truss(1)

