.TH j_stat.d 1m   "$Date:: 2007-10-03 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
j_stat.d - Java operation stats using DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B j_stat.d
[interval [count]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This traces activity from all Java processes on the system with hotspot
provider support (1.6.0). Method calls and object allocation are only
visible when using the flag "+ExtendedDTraceProbes". eg,
java -XX:+ExtendedDTraceProbes classfile

The numbers are counts for the interval specified. The default interval
is 1 second.

If you see a count in "EXECS" but not in the other columns, then your
Java software is probably not running with the DTrace hotspot provider.

If you see counts in "CLOAD" but not in "METHODS", then you Java
software probably isn't running with "+ExtendedDTraceProbes".
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
Evolving - uses the DTrace hotspot provider, which may change 
as additional features are introduced. Check Java/Readme
to see what version these scripts are based on.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output,
# 
.B j_stat.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
EXEC/s
Java programs executed per second, including
those without Java provider support
.TP
METHOD/s
Methods called, per second
.TP
OBJNEW/s
Objects created, per second
.TP
CLOAD/s
Class loads, per second
.TP
EXCP/s
Exceptions raised, per second
.TP
RESC/s
Rescues, per second
.TP
GC/s
Garbage collects, per second
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Examples, Notes and Docs directories. The example files may be
especially useful as they aim to demonstrate how to interpret
the output.
.SH EXIT
j_stat.d will run until Ctrl-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[CA, USA]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)
