.TH pfilestat 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
pfilestat \- show I/O latency break down by FD. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pfilestat [\-r|\-w] pid
.SH DESCRIPTION
This prints I/O statistics for each file descriptor within a process.
In particular, the time break down during read() and write() events is
measured.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
unstable - this script uses fbt provider probes which may change for
future updates of the OS, invalidating this script. Please read
Docs/Notes/ALLfbt_notes.txt for further details about these fbt scripts.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-r
reads only
.TP
\-w
writes only
.TP
pid
process ID to examine
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Sample both read and write activity for PID 81,
# 
.B pfilestat 81
.TP
Sample reads only for PID 81,
#
.B pfilestat
\-r 81
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
STATE
microstate. see STATES below.
.TP
FDUM
file Descriptor ID
.TP
Time
percentage of wallclock time in each STATE
.TP
File
Name of file, if known
.PP
.SH STATES
.TP
read
Time spent during the execution of the read() syscall.
.TP
write
Time spent during the execution of the write() syscall.
.TP
waitcpu
Latency spent waiting to be scheduled after becoming runnable.
.TP
running
Process running user-mode code.
.TP
sleep-r
Process sleeping on reads.
.TP
sleep-w
Process sleeping on writes.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
pfilestat is discussed and demonstrated in Solaris Internals 2nd edition,
volume 2. 

See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
pfilestat will sample until Ctrl\-C is hit. 
.SH AUTHOR
Richard McDougall
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)
