.TH rwsnoop 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
rwsnoop \- snoop read/write events. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rwsnoop
[\-jPtvZ] [\-n name] [\-p PID]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This is measuring reads and writes at the application level. This
matches the syscalls read, write, pread and pwrite.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
stable - needs the syscall provider.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-j
print project ID
.TP
\-P
print parent process ID
.TP
\-t
print timestamp, us
.TP
\-v
print time, string
.TP
\-Z
print zone ID
.TP
\-n name
process name to track
.TP
\-p PID
PID to track
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output,
# 
.B rwsnoop
.TP
Print zone ID,
# 
.B rwsnoop
-\Z
.TP
Monitor processes named "bash",
#
.B rwsnoop
\-n bash
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
TIME
timestamp, us
.TP
TIMESTR
time, string
.TP
ZONE
zone ID
.TP
PROJ
project ID
.TP
UID
user ID
.TP
PID
process ID
.TP
PPID
parent process ID
.TP
CMD
command name for the process
.TP
D
direction, Read or Write
.TP
BYTES
total bytes during sample
.TP
FILE
filename, if file based. 
Reads and writes that are not file based, for example with sockets, will
print "<unknown>" as the filename.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
rwsnoop will run forever until Ctrl\-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
rwtop(1M), dtrace(1M)

