.TH sh_pidcolors.d 1m   "$Date:: 2007-10-03 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
sh_pidcolors.d - Demonstration of deeper DTrace Bourne shell analysis.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sh_pidcolors.d
{ \-p PID | \-c cmd }	
.SH DESCRIPTION
This extends sh_syscolors.d by including some "pid" provider tracing
as a starting point for deeper analysis. Currently it adds the probes,

pid$target:a.out:e*:entry,
pid$target:a.out:e*:return

which means, all functions from the /usr/bin/sh binary that begin with
the letter "e". This adds about 34 probes. Customise it to whichever
parts of /usr/bin/sh or the system libraries you are interested in.

The filename for syscalls may be printed as the shell name, if the
script was invoked using the form "shell filename" rather than running
the script with an interpreter line.
.SH OS
Any
.SH STABILITY
Evolving - uses the DTrace Shell provider, which may change 
as additional features are introduced. Check Shell/Readme
to see what version these scripts are based on.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output,
# 
.B sh_pidcolors.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
C
CPU-id
.TP
PID
Process ID
.TP
DELTA(us)
Elapsed time from previous line to this line
.TP
FILE
Filename of the shell script
.TP
LINE
Line number of filename
.TP
TYPE
Type of call (func/builtin/cmd/line/shell)
.TP
NAME
Shell function, builtin or command name
.SH WARNING
Watch the first column carefully, it prints the CPU-id. If it
changes, then it is very likely that the output has been shuffled.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Examples, Notes and Docs directories. The example files may be
especially useful as they aim to demonstrate how to interpret
the output.
.SH EXIT
sh_pidcolors.d will run until Ctrl-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[CA, USA]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)
