.TH sh_syscolors.d 1m   "$Date:: 2007-10-03 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
sh_syscolors.d - trace Bourne shell flow plus syscalls, in color.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sh_syscolors.d
{ \-p PID | \-c cmd }	
.SH DESCRIPTION
This watches shell function entries and returns, and indents child
function calls. Shell builtins, commands and lines are also printed.

The filename for syscalls may be printed as the shell name, if the
script was invoked using the form "shell filename" rather than running
the script with an interpreter line.
.SH OS
Any
.SH STABILITY
Evolving - uses the DTrace Shell provider, which may change 
as additional features are introduced. Check Shell/Readme
to see what version these scripts are based on.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output,
# 
.B sh_syscolors.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
C
CPU-id
.TP
PID
Process ID
.TP
DELTA(us)
Elapsed time from previous line to this line
.TP
FILE
Filename of the shell script
.TP
LINE
Line number of filename
.TP
TYPE
Type of call (func/builtin/cmd/line/shell)
.TP
NAME
Shell function, builtin or command name
.SH WARNING
Watch the first column carefully, it prints the CPU-id. If it
changes, then it is very likely that the output has been shuffled.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Examples, Notes and Docs directories. The example files may be
especially useful as they aim to demonstrate how to interpret
the output.
.SH EXIT
sh_syscolors.d will run until Ctrl-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[CA, USA]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)
