.TH swapinfo.d 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
swapinfo.d \- print virtual memory info. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B swapinfo.d
.SH DESCRIPTION
Prints swap usage details for RAM and disk based swap.

This script is UNDER CONSTRUCTION, check for newer versions.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
unstable - uses various kernel symbols.
.SH FIELDS
.TP
RAM Total
Total RAM installed
.TP
RAM Unusable
RAM consumed by the OBP and TSBs
.TP
RAM Kernel
Kernel resident in RAM (and usually locked)
.TP
RAM Locked
Locked memory pages from swap (Anon)
.TP
RAM Used
anon + exec + file pages used
.TP
RAM Free
free memory + page cache free
.TP
Disk Total
Total disk swap configured
.TP
Disk Resv
Disk swap allocated + reserved
.TP
Disk Avail
Disk swap available for reservation
.TP
Swap Total
Total Virtual Memory usable
.TP
Swap Resv
VM allocated + reserved
.TP
Swap Avail
VM available for reservation
.TP
Swap MinFree
VM kept free from reservations
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Print info,
# 
.B swapinfo.d
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
swapstat - K9Toolkit

vmstat 1 2; swap -s; echo ::memstat | mdb -k

RMCmem - The MemTool Package

RICHPse - The SE Toolkit

"Clearing up swap space confusion" Unix Insider, Adrian Cockcroft

"Solaris Internals", Jim Mauro, Richard McDougall

/usr/include/vm/anon.h, /usr/include/sys/systm.h

.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)

