.TH vmstat.d 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
vmstat.d \- vmstat demo in DTrace. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vmstat.d
.SH DESCRIPTION
This has been written to demonstrate fetching the same data as vmstat
from DTrace. This program is intended as a starting point for other
DTrace scripts, by beginning with familiar statistics.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
unstable - uses various kernel symbols.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Print virtual memory statistics every second,
# 
.B vmstat.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
w
swapped out light weight processes
.TP
swap
virtual memory free, Kbytes
.TP
free
free RAM, Kbytes
.TP
re
page reclaims, Kbytes
.TP
mf
minor faults, Kbytes
.TP
pi
page ins, Kbytes
.TP
po
page outs, Kbytes
.TP
fr
pages freed, Kbytes
.TP
sr
scan rate, pages
.TP
in
interrupts, number
.TP
sy
system calls, number
.TP
cs
context switches, number
.PP
.SH NOTES
Most of the statistics are in units of kilobytes, unlike the
original vmstat command which sometimes uses page counts.

As this program does not use Kstat, there is no summary since boot line.

Free RAM is both free free + cache free.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
vmstat.d will run until Ctrl\-C is hit. 
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
vmstat(1M), dtrace(1M)
