.TH vmstat-p.d 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
vmstat-p.d \- vmstat -p demo in DTrace. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vmstat-p.d
.SH DESCRIPTION
This has been written to demonstrate fetching similar data as vmstat
from DTrace. This program is intended as a starting point for other
DTrace scripts, by beginning with familiar statistics.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
unstable - uses various kernel symbols.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Print virtual memory statistics every second,
# 
.B vmstat-p.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
swap
virtual memory free, Kbytes
.TP
free
free RAM, Kbytes
.TP
re
page reclaims, Kbytes
.TP
mf
minor faults, Kbytes
.TP
sr
scan rate, pages
.TP
epi
executable page ins, Kbytes
.TP
epo
executable page outs, Kbytes
.TP
epf
executable frees, Kbytes
.TP
api
anonymous page ins, Kbytes
.TP
apo
anonymous page outs, Kbytes
.TP
apf
anonymous frees, Kbytes
.TP
fpi
filesystem page ins, Kbytes
.TP
fpo
filesystem page outs, Kbytes
.TP
fpf
filesystem frees, Kbytes
.PP
.SH NOTES
Most of the statistics are in units of kilobytes, unlike the
original vmstat command which sometimes uses page counts.

As this program does not use Kstat, there is no summary since boot line.

Free RAM is both free free + cache free.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
vmstat-p.d will run until Ctrl\-C is hit. 
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
vmstat(1M), dtrace(1M)
