.TH weblatency.d 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
weblatency.d \- website latency statistics. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B weblatency.d
.SH DESCRIPTION
This prints statistics for hostnames that browers have set GET requests 
for, in particular latency by hostname.

The latency measured is from the browser sending the GET
request to when the browser begins to recieve the response. It
is an overall response time for the client, and encompasses
connection speed delays, DNS lookups, proxy delays, and web server
response time.

This is written as an experimental tool, and may not work at all with
your browser.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
unstable - depends on browser implementation.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Print report after Ctrl-C is hit,
# 
.B weblatency.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
HOST
hostname from URL
.TP
NUM
number of GETs
.TP
AVGTIME(ms)
Average time for response, ms
.TP
MAXTIME(ms)
Maximum time for response, ms
.PP
.SH NOTES
See the source code for the "BROWSER" variable, which sets the browser
to trace (currently set to "mozilla-bin").
.PP
.SH IDEA
Bryan Cantrill (who wrote an elegant version for Sol 10 update 1)
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
weblatency.d will sample until Ctrl\-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)

