.TH zvmstat 1m  "$Date:: 2007-08-05 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
zvmstat \- print vmstat style info per Zone. Uses DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zvmstat
[\-t] [interval [count]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
This program must be run from the global zone as root.

Since this uses DTrace, only the root user or users with the
dtrace_kernel privilege can run this command.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
stable - needs the syscall and vminfo providers.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\-t
Print timestamps, string
.TP
interval
Duration for each sample, seconds. default is 1.
.TP
count
Number of samples. default is 1.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Print virtual memory statistics every second,
# 
.B zvmstat
.TP
Print every 5 seconds, 6 times,
#
.B zvmstat
5 6
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
ZONE
zonename
.TP
re
page reclaims, pages
.TP
mf
minor faults, pages
.TP
fr
pages freed, pages
.TP
sr
scan rate, pages
.TP
epi
executable page ins, pages
.TP
epo
executable page outs, pages
.TP
epf
executable frees, pages
.TP
api
anonymous page ins, pages
.TP
apo
anonymous page outs, pages
.TP
apf
anonymous frees, pages
.TP
fpi
filesystem page ins, pages
.TP
fpo
filesystem page outs, pages
.TP
fpf
filesystem frees, pages
.PP
.SH NOTES
Most of the statistics are in units of pages, unlike the
original vmstat command which sometimes uses kilobytes.

All page values are a total for the sample duration.

As this program does not use Kstat, there is no summary since boot line.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Docs directory. The DTraceToolkit docs may include full worked
examples with verbose descriptions explaining the output.
.SH EXIT
zvmstat will run until Ctrl\-C is hit, or until the count argument
has been satisfied.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[Sydney, Australia]
.SH SEE ALSO
vmstat(1M), dtrace(1M)
