.\" Copyright (c) 2002, 2004
.\"	Thomas Quinot <thomas@FreeBSD.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 22, 2009
.Dt ATAPICAM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm atapicam
.Nd CAM XPT (transport) module for ATAPI devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device ata"
.Cd "device atapicam"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
atapicam_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The ATAPI/CAM module allows ATAPI devices (CD-ROM, CD-RW, DVD drives,
floppy drives such as Iomega Zip, tape drives) to be accessed through
the SCSI subsystem,
.Xr cam 4 .
.Pp
.Xr ata 4
and
.Xr scbus 4
must be configured in the kernel as well.
The SCSI target drivers
.Xr ( cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
or
.Xr st 4 )
can then be used to access the devices.
The generic passthrough device,
.Xr pass 4 ,
can also be used to send SCSI commands directly
to the devices through the CAM API.
.Pp
A separate CAM bus is created for each ATA bus in the system.
On each of these buses, target ID 0 is assigned to the master
device, and ID 1 is assigned to the slave
(provided they are ATAPI devices).
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Some SCSI commands are intercepted by the driver, and undergo special
processing in order to work around limitations of ATAPI devices.
Such limitations can be consequences of the ATAPI specification.
For example, ATAPI devices do not implement the 6-byte versions
of
.Dv MODE_SELECT , MODE_SENSE , READ ,
or
.Dv WRITE .
They can also be common bugs, such as hanging when queried for
extended
.Dv INQUIRY
information.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device ata
device atapicam
device scbus
device cd
device pass
.Ed
.Pp
Add the
.Nm
driver to the kernel.
.Pp
.Dl "camcontrol devlist"
.Pp
Print the list of all devices available through CAM.
.Pp
.Dl "mount -t cd9660 /dev/cd0 /mnt"
.Pp
Mount a CD-ROM from an ATAPI CD-ROM drive
(the command above assumes that the ATAPI drive is the only CD-ROM unit).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ata 4 ,
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr atacontrol 8 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.Sh HISTORY
The ATAPI/CAM driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.8
and
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The ATAPI/CAM driver was written by
.An Thomas Quinot Aq thomas@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
and ATAPI-specific target drivers
.Xr ( acd 4 ,
.Xr ast 4 ,
and
.Xr afd 4 )
can be configured in the same kernel.
Simultaneous access to the same device through the SCSI generic drivers
and the ATAPI-specific drivers may cause problems and is strongly discouraged.
