.\" Copyright (c) 2011-2013, Chelsio Inc
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Chelsio Inc nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 18, 2013
.Dt CXGBE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cxgbe
.Nd "Chelsio T4 and T5 based 40Gb, 10Gb, and 1Gb Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device cxgbe"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
t4fw_cfg_load="YES"
t5fw_cfg_load="YES"
if_cxgbe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Express Ethernet adapters based on
the Chelsio Terminator 4 and Terminator 5 ASICs (T4 and T5).
The driver supports Jumbo Frames, Transmit/Receive checksum offload,
TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO), VLAN
tag insertion/extraction, VLAN checksum offload, VLAN TSO, and
Receive Side Steering (RSS).
For further hardware information and questions related to hardware
requirements, see
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
Note that ports of T5 cards are named cxl and attach to a t5nex parent device
(in contrast to ports named cxgbe that attach to a t4nex parent for a T4 card).
Loader tunables with the hw.cxgbe prefix apply to both T4 and T5 cards.
The sysctl MIBs are at dev.t5nex and dev.cxl for T5 cards and at dev.t4nex and
dev.cxgbe for T4 cards.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports 40Gb, 10Gb and 1Gb Ethernet adapters based on the T5 ASIC
(ports will be named cxl):
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Chelsio T580-CR
.It
Chelsio T580-LP-CR
.It
Chelsio T580-LP-SO-CR
.It
Chelsio T560-CR
.It
Chelsio T540-CR
.It
Chelsio T540-LP-CR
.It
Chelsio T522-CR
.It
Chelsio T520-LL-CR
.It
Chelsio T520-CR
.It
Chelsio T520-SO
.It
Chelsio T520-BT
.It
Chelsio T504-BT
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports 10Gb and 1Gb Ethernet adapters based on the T4 ASIC:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Chelsio T420-CR
.It
Chelsio T422-CR
.It
Chelsio T440-CR
.It
Chelsio T420-BCH
.It
Chelsio T440-BCH
.It
Chelsio T440-CH
.It
Chelsio T420-SO
.It
Chelsio T420-CX
.It
Chelsio T420-BT
.It
Chelsio T404-BT
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.cxgbe.ntxq10g
The number of tx queues to use for a 10Gb port.
The default is 16 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nrxq10g
The number of rx queues to use for a 10Gb port.
The default is 8 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.ntxq1g
The number of tx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default is 4 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nrxq1g
The number of rx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default is 2 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nofldtxq10g
The number of TOE tx queues to use for a 10Gb port.
The default is 8 or the
number of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nofldrxq10g
The number of TOE rx queues to use for a 10Gb port.
The default is 2 or the
number of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nofldtxq1g
The number of TOE tx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default is 2 or the
number of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nofldrxq1g
The number of TOE rx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default is 1.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_timer_idx_10G
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_timer_idx_1G
The timer index value to use to delay interrupts.
The holdoff timer list has the values 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, and 200
by default (all values are in microseconds) and the index selects a
value from this list.
The default value is 1 for both 10Gb and 1Gb ports, which means the
timer value is 5us.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values at any time via the
dev.cxgbe.X.holdoff_tmr_idx or dev.cxl.X.holdoff_tmr_idx sysctl.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_pktc_idx_10G
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_pktc_idx_1G
The packet-count index value to use to delay interrupts.
The packet-count list has the values 1, 8, 16, and 32 by default
and the index selects a value from this list.
The default value is -1 for both 10Gb and 1Gb ports, which means packet
counting is disabled and interrupts are generated based solely on the
holdoff timer value.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values via the
dev.cxgbe.X.holdoff_pktc_idx or dev.cxl.X.holdoff_pktc_idx sysctl.
This sysctl works only when the interface has never been marked up (as done by
ifconfig up).
.It Va hw.cxgbe.qsize_txq
The size, in number of entries, of the descriptor ring used for a tx
queue.
A buf_ring of the same size is also allocated for additional
software queuing.
See
.Xr ifnet 9 .
The default value is 1024.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values via the
dev.cxgbe.X.qsize_txq sysctl or dev.cxl.X.qsize_txq sysctl.
This sysctl works only when the interface has never been marked up (as done by
ifconfig up).
.It Va hw.cxgbe.qsize_rxq
The size, in number of entries, of the descriptor ring used for an
rx queue.
The default value is 1024.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values via the
dev.cxgbe.X.qsize_rxq or dev.cxl.X.qsize_rxq sysctl.
This sysctl works only when the interface has never been marked up (as done by
ifconfig up).
.It Va hw.cxgbe.interrupt_types
The interrupt types that the driver is allowed to use.
Bit 0 represents INTx (line interrupts), bit 1 MSI, bit 2 MSI-X.
The default is 7 (all allowed).
The driver will select the best possible type out of the allowed types by
itself.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.fw_install
0 prohibits the driver from installing a firmware on the card.
1 allows the driver to install a new firmware if internal driver
heuristics indicate that the new firmware is preferable to the one
already on the card.
2 instructs the driver to always install the new firmware on the card as
long as it is compatible with the driver and is a different version than
the one already on the card.
The default is 1.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.config_file
Select a pre-packaged device configuration file.
A configuration file contains a recipe for partitioning and configuring the
hardware resources on the card.
This tunable is for specialized applications only and should not be used in
normal operation.
The configuration profile currently in use is available in the dev.t4nex.X.cf
and dev.t4nex.X.cfcsum sysctls.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.linkcaps_allowed
.It Va hw.cxgbe.niccaps_allowed
.It Va hw.cxgbe.toecaps_allowed
.It Va hw.cxgbe.rdmacaps_allowed
.It Va hw.cxgbe.iscsicaps_allowed
.It Va hw.cxgbe.fcoecaps_allowed
Disallowing capabilities provides a hint to the driver and firmware to not
reserve hardware resources for that feature.
Each of these is a bit field with a bit for each sub-capability within the
capability.
This tunable is for specialized applications only and should not be used in
normal operation.
The capabilities for which hardware resources have been reserved are listed in
dev.t4nex.X.*caps sysctls.
.El
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Chelsio support website at:
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
If an issue is identified with this driver with a supported adapter,
email all the specific information related to the issue to
.Aq support@chelsio.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cxgb 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 9.0 .
Support for T5 cards first appeared in
.Fx 9.2
and
.Fx 10.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Navdeep Parhar Aq np@FreeBSD.org .
