@ignore
This file documents the user interface to the GNU History library.

Copyright (C) 1988, 1991 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
Authored by Brian Fox and Chet Ramey.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this manual
provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are preserved on
all copies.

Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
GNU Copyright statement is available to the distributee, and provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions.
@end ignore

@node Using History Interactively
@chapter Using History Interactively

@ifset BashFeatures
This chapter describes how to use the GNU History Library interactively,
from a user's standpoint.  It should be considered a user's guide.  For
information on using the GNU History Library in your own programs,
see the GNU Readline Library Manual.
@end ifset
@ifclear BashFeatures
This chapter describes how to use the GNU History Library interactively,
from a user's standpoint.  It should be considered a user's guide.  For
information on using the GNU History Library in your own programs,
@pxref{Programming with GNU History}.
@end ifclear

@menu
* History Interaction::		What it feels like using History as a user.
@end menu

@node History Interaction
@section History Interaction
@cindex expansion

The History library provides a history expansion feature that is similar
to the history expansion in @code{csh}.  The following text describes
the syntax used to manipulate the history information.

History expansion takes place in two parts.  The first is to determine
which line from the previous history should be used during substitution.
The second is to select portions of that line for inclusion into the
current one.  The line selected from the previous history is called the
@dfn{event}, and the portions of that line that are acted upon are
called @dfn{words}.  The line is broken into words in the same fashion
that Bash does, so that several English (or Unix) words
surrounded by quotes are considered as one word.

@menu
* Event Designators::	How to specify which history line to use.
* Word Designators::	Specifying which words are of interest.
* Modifiers::		Modifying the results of substitution.
@end menu

@node Event Designators
@subsection Event Designators
@cindex event designators

An event designator is a reference to a command line entry in the
history list.

@table @asis

@item @code{!}
Start a history substitution, except when followed by a space, tab,
the end of the line, @key{=} or @key{(}.

@item @code{!!}
Refer to the previous command.  This is a synonym for @code{!-1}.

@item @code{!n}
Refer to command line @var{n}.

@item @code{!-n}
Refer to the command line @var{n} lines back.

@item @code{!string}
Refer to the most recent command starting with @var{string}.

@item @code{!?string}[@code{?}]
Refer to the most recent command containing @var{string}.

@item @code{!#}
The entire command line typed so far.

@item @code{^string1^string2^}
Quick Substitution.  Repeat the last command, replacing @var{string1}
with @var{string2}.  Equivalent to
@code{!!:s/string1/string2/}.

@end table

@node Word Designators
@subsection Word Designators

A @key{:} separates the event specification from the word designator.  It
can be omitted if the word designator begins with a @key{^}, @key{$},
@key{*} or @key{%}.  Words are numbered from the beginning of the line,
with the first word being denoted by a 0 (zero).

@table @code

@item 0 (zero)
The @code{0}th word.  For many applications, this is the command word.

@item n
The @var{n}th word.

@item ^
The first argument;  that is, word 1.

@item $
The last argument.

@item %
The word matched by the most recent @code{?string?} search.

@item x-y
A range of words; @code{-@var{y}} abbreviates @code{0-@var{y}}.

@item *
All of the words, except the @code{0}th.  This is a synonym for @code{1-$}.
It is not an error to use @key{*} if there is just one word in the event;
the empty string is returned in that case.

@item x*
Abbreviates @code{x-$}

@item x-
Abbreviates @code{x-$} like @code{x*}, but omits the last word.

@end table

@node Modifiers
@subsection Modifiers

After the optional word designator, you can add a sequence of one or more
of the following modifiers, each preceded by a @key{:}.

@table @code

@item h
Remove a trailing pathname component, leaving only the head.

@item r
Remove a trailing suffix of the form @samp{.}@var{suffix}, leaving the basename.

@item e
Remove all but the trailing suffix.

@item t
Remove all leading  pathname  components, leaving the tail.

@item p
Print the new command but do not execute it.

@ifset BashFeatures
@item q
Quote the substituted words, escaping further substitutions.

@item x
Quote the substituted words as with @code{q},         
but break into words at spaces, tabs, and newlines.
@end ifset

@item s/old/new/
Substitute @var{new} for the first occurrence of @var{old} in the
event line.  Any delimiter may be used in place of @key{/}.
The delimiter may be quoted in @var{old} and @var{new}
with a single backslash.  If @key{&} appears in @var{new},
it is replaced by @var{old}.  A single backslash will quote
the @key{&}.  The final delimiter is optional if it is the last
character on the input line.

@item &
Repeat the previous substitution.

@item g
Cause changes to be applied over the entire event line.  Used in
conjunction with @code{s}, as in @code{gs/old/new/}, or with
@code{&}.

@end table
