.\"
.\" Copyright 1996 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and
.\" its documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby
.\" granted, provided that both the above copyright notice and this
.\" permission notice appear in all copies, that both the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all
.\" supporting documentation, and that the name of M.I.T. not be used
.\" in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the
.\" software without specific, written prior permission.  M.I.T. makes
.\" no representations about the suitability of this software for any
.\" purpose.  It is provided "as is" without express or implied
.\" warranty.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY M.I.T. ``AS IS''.  M.I.T. DISCLAIMS
.\" ALL EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. IN NO EVENT
.\" SHALL M.I.T. BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF
.\" USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND
.\" ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT
.\" OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd October 11, 2004
.Os
.Dt RTALLOC 9
.Sh NAME
.Nm rtalloc ,
.Nm rtalloc_ign ,
.Nm rtalloc1 ,
.Nm rtfree
.Nd look up a route in the kernel routing table
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/socket.h
.In net/route.h
.Ft void
.Fn rtalloc "struct route *ro"
.Ft void
.Fn rtalloc_ign "struct route *ro" "u_long flags"
.Ft "struct rtentry *"
.Fn rtalloc1 "struct sockaddr *sa" "int report" "u_long flags"
.Ft void
.Fn rtfree "struct rt_entry *rt"
.Fn RTFREE "struct rt_entry *rt"
.Fn RT_LOCK "struct rt_entry *rt"
.Fn RT_UNLOCK "struct rt_entry *rt"
.Fn RT_ADDREF "struct rt_entry *rt"
.Fn RT_REMREF "struct rt_entry *rt"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The kernel uses a radix tree structure to manage routes for the
networking subsystem.
The
.Fn rtalloc
family of routines is used by protocols to query this structure for a
route corresponding to a particular end-node address, and to cause
certain protocol\- and interface-specific actions to take place.
.\" XXX - -mdoc should contain a standard request for getting em and
.\" en dashes.
.Pp
When a route with the flag
.Dv RTF_CLONING
is retrieved, and the action of this flag is not masked, the
.Nm
facility automatically generates a new route using information in the
old route as a template, and
sends an
.Dv RTM_RESOLVE
message to the appropriate interface-address route-management routine
.Pq Fn ifa->ifa_rtrequest .
This generated route is called
.Em cloned ,
and has
.Dv RTF_WASCLONED
flag set.
.Dv RTF_PRCLONING
flag is obsolete and thus ignored by facility.
If the
.Dv RTF_XRESOLVE
flag is set, then the
.Dv RTM_RESOLVE
message is sent instead on the
.Xr route 4
socket interface, requesting that an external program resolve the
address in question and modify the route appropriately.
.Pp
The default interface is
.Fn rtalloc .
Its only argument is
.Fa ro ,
a pointer to a
.Dq Li "struct route" ,
which is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct route {
	struct sockaddr ro_dst;
	struct rtentry *ro_rt;
};
.Ed
.Pp
Thus, this function can only be used for address families which are
smaller than the default
.Dq Li "struct sockaddr" .
Before calling
.Fn rtalloc
for the first time, callers should ensure that unused bits of the
structure are set to zero.
On subsequent calls,
.Fn rtalloc
returns without performing a lookup if
.Fa ro->ro_rt
is non-null and the
.Dv RTF_UP
flag is set in the route's
.Li rt_flags
field.
.Pp
The
.Fn rtalloc_ign
interface can be used when the default actions of
.Fn rtalloc
in the presence of the
.Dv RTF_CLONING
flag is undesired.
The
.Fa ro
argument is the same as
.Fn rtalloc ,
but there is additionally a
.Fa flags
argument, which lists the flags in the route which are to be
.Em ignored
(in most cases this is
.Dv RTF_CLONING
flag).
Both
.Fn rtalloc
and
.Fn rtalloc_ign
functions return a pointer to an unlocked
.Vt "struct rtentry" .
.Pp
The
.Fn rtalloc1
function is the most general form of
.Fn rtalloc
(and both of the other forms are implemented as calls to rtalloc1).
It does not use the
.Dq Li "struct route" ,
and is therefore suitable for address families which require more
space than is in a traditional
.Dq Li "struct sockaddr" .
Instead, it takes a
.Dq Li "struct sockaddr *"
directly as the
.Fa sa
argument.
The second argument,
.Fa report ,
controls whether
.Dv RTM_RESOLVE
requests are sent to the lower layers when an
.Dv RTF_CLONING
or
.Dv RTF_PRCLONING
route is cloned.
Ordinarily a value of one should be passed, except
in the processing of those lower layers which use the cloning
facility.
The third argument,
.Fa flags ,
is a set of flags to ignore, as in
.Fn rtalloc_ign .
The
.Fn rtalloc1
function returns a pointer to a locked
.Vt "struct rtentry" .
.Pp
The
.Fn rtfree
function frees a locked route entry, e.g., a previously allocated by
.Fn rtalloc1 .
.Pp
The
.Fn RTFREE
macro is used to free unlocked route entries, previously allocated by
.Fn rtalloc
or
.Fn rtalloc_ign .
The
.Fn RTFREE
macro decrements the reference count on the routing table entry (see below),
and frees it if the reference count has reached zero.
.Pp
The preferred usage is allocating a route using
.Fn rtalloc
or
.Fn rtalloc_ign
and freeing using
.Fn RTFREE .
.Pp
The
.Fn RT_LOCK
macro is used to lock a routing table entry.
The
.Fn RT_UNLOCK
macro is used to unlock a routing table entry.
.Pp
The
.Fn RT_ADDREF
macro increments the reference count on a previously locked route entry.
The
.Fn RT_REMREF
macro decrements the reference count on a previously locked route entry.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn rtalloc ,
.Fn rtalloc_ign
and
.Fn rtfree
functions do not return a value.
The
.Fn rtalloc1
function returns a pointer to a routing-table entry if it succeeds,
otherwise a null pointer.
Lack of a route should in most cases be
translated to the
.Xr errno 2
value
.Er EHOSTUNREACH .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr route 4 ,
.Xr rtentry 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
facility first appeared in
.Bx 4.2 ,
although with much different internals.
The
.Fn rtalloc_ign
function and the
.Fa flags
argument to
.Fn rtalloc1
first appeared in
.Fx 2.0 .
Routing table locking was introduced in
.Fx 5.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Garrett Wollman ,
as were the changes to implement
.Dv RTF_PRCLONING
and the
.Fn rtalloc_ign
function and the
.Fa flags
argument to
.Fn rtalloc1 .
