''' $Header
'''
.de Sh
.br
.ne 5
.PP
\fB\\$1\fR
.PP
..
.de Sp
.if t .sp .5v
.if n .sp
..
.de Ip
.br
.ie \\n.$>=3 .ne \\$3
.el .ne 3
.IP "\\$1" \\$2
..
'''
'''     Set up \*(-- to give an unbreakable dash;
'''     string Tr holds user defined translation string.
'''     Greek uppercase omega is used as a dummy character.
'''
.tr \(*W-|\(bv\*(Tr
.ie n \{\
.ds -- \(*W-
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=24u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-12u'-\" diablo 10 pitch
.if (\n(.H=4u)&(1m=20u) .ds -- \(*W\h'-12u'\(*W\h'-8u'-\" diablo 12 pitch
.ds L" ""
.ds R" ""
.ds L' '
.ds R' '
'br\}
.el\{\
.ds -- \(em\|
.tr \*(Tr
.ds L" ``
.ds R" ''
.ds L' `
.ds R' '
'br\}
.TH XNTPDC 8 LOCAL
.SH NAME
xntpdc - query/control program for the Network Time Protocol daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B xntpdc
[
.B -ilnps
] [
.B -c
.I command
] [
.I host
] [
.I ...
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I Xntpdc
is used to query the
.IR xntpd (8)
daemon about its current state and to request changes in that state. The
program may be run either in interactive mode or controlled using
command line arguments. Extensive state and statistics information is
available through the
.I xntpdc
interface. In addition, nearly all the configuration options which can
be specified at start up using
.IR xntpd 's
configuration file may also be specified at run time using
.IR xntpdc .
.PP
If one or more request options is included on the command line when
.I xntpdc
is executed, each of the requests will be sent to the NTP servers
running on each of the hosts given as command line arguments, or on
.I localhost
by default. If no request options are given,
.I xntpdc
will attempt to read commands from the standard input and execute these
on the NTP server running on the first host given on the command line,
again defaulting to
.I localhost
when no other host is specified.
.I Xntpdc
will prompt for commands if the standard input is a terminal device.
.PP
.I Xntpdc
uses NTP mode 7 packets to communicate with the NTP server, and hence
can be used to query any compatable server on the network which permits
it. Note that since NTP is a UDP protocol this communication will be
somewhat unreliable, especially over large distances in terms of network
topology.
.I Xntpdc
makes no attempt to retransmit requests, and will time requests out if
the remote host is not heard from within a suitable time out time.
.PP
Command line options are described following. Specifying a command line
option other than
.B -i
or
.B -n
will cause the specified query (queries) to be sent to the indicated
host(s) immediately. Otherwise,
.I xntpdc
will attempt to read interactive format commands from the standard
input.
.Ip -c 8
The following argument is interpreted as an interactive format command
and is added to the list of commands to be executed on the specified
host(s). Multiple
.B -c
options may be given.
.Ip -i 8
Force
.I xntpdc
to operate in interactive mode. Prompts will be written to the standard
output and commands read from the standard input.
.Ip -l 8
Obtain a list of peers which are known to the server(s). This switch is
equivalent to \*(L"-c listpeers\*(R".
.Ip -n 8
Output all host addresses in dotted\-quad numeric format rather than
converting to the canonical host names.
.Ip -p 8
Print a list of the peers known to the server as well as a summary of
their state. This is equivalent to \*(L"-c peers\*(R".
.Ip -s 8
Print a list of the peers known to the server as well as a summary of
their state, but in a slightly different format than the
.B -p
switch. This is equivalent to \*(L"-c dmpeers\*(R".
.SH INTERNAL COMMANDS
.PP
Interactive format commands consist of a keyword followed by zero to
four arguments. Only enough characters of the full keyword to uniquely
identify the command need be typed. The output of a command is normally
sent to the standard output, but optionally the output of individual
commands may be sent to a file by appending a \*(L">\*(R", followed by a
file name, to the command line.
.PP
A number of interactive format commands are executed entirely within the
.I xntpdc
program itself and do not result in NTP mode 7 requests being sent to a
server. These are described following.
.PP
.B ?
[
.I command_keyword
]
.PP
A \*(L"?\*(R" by itself will print a list of all the command keywords
known to this incarnation of
.IR xntpdc .
A \*(L"?\*(R" followed by a command keyword will print funcation and
usage information about the command. This command is probably a better
source of information about
.I xntpdc
than this manual page.
.PP
.B help
[
.I command_keyword
]
.PP
A synonym for the
.B ?
command.
.PP
.B timeout
.I millseconds
.PP
Specify a time out period for responses to server queries. The default
is about 8000 milliseconds.
.PP
.B delay
.I milliseconds
.PP
Specify a time interval to be added to timestamps included in requests
which require authentication. This is used to enable (unreliable) server
reconfiguration over long delay network paths or between machines whose
clocks are unsynchronized.
.PP
.B host
.I hostname
.PP
Set the host to which future queries will be sent.
.I Hostname
may be either a host name or a numeric (dotted quad) dmaddress.
.PP
.B keyid
.I #
.PP
This command allows the specification of a key number to be used to
authenticate configuration requests. This must correspond to the key
number the server has been configured to use for this purpose.
.PP
.B passwd
.PP
This command prompts you to type in a password (which will not be
echoed) which will be used to authenticate configuration requests. The
password must correspond to the key configured for use by the NTP server
for this purpose if such requests are to be successful.
.PP
.B "hostnames yes|no"
.PP
If \*(L"yes\*(R" is specified, host names are printed in information
displays. If \*(L"no\*(R" is given, numeric addresses are printed
instead. The default is \*(L"yes\*(R" unless modified using the command
line
.B -n
switch.
.PP
.B quit
.PP
Exit
.IR xntpdc .
.SH QUERY COMMANDS
.PP
Query commands result in NTP mode 7 packets containing requests for
information being sent to the server. These are \*(L"read\-only\*(R"
commands in that they make no modification of the server configuration
state.
.PP
.B listpeers
.PP
Obtains and prints a brief list of the peers for which the server is
maintaining state. These should include all configured peer associations
as well as those peers whose stratum is such that they are considered by
the server to be possible future synchonization candidates.
.PP
.B peers
.PP
Obtains a list of peers for which the server is maintaining state, along
with a summary of that state. Summary information includes the address
of the remote peer, the local interface address (0.0.0.0 if a local
address has yet to be determined), the stratum of the remote peer (a
stratum of 16 indicates the remote peer is unsynchronized), the polling
interval, in seconds, the reachability register, in octal, and the
current estimated delay, offset and dispersion of the peer, all in
seconds. In addition, the character in the left margin indicates the
mode this peer entry is operating in. A \*(L"+\*(R" denotes symmetric
active, a \*(L"-\*(R" indicates symmetric passive, a \*(L"=\*(R" means
the remote server is being polled in client mode, a \*(L"^\*(R"
indicates that the server is broadcasting to this address, a \*(L"~\*(R"
denotes that the remote peer is sending broadcasts and a \*(L"*\*(R"
marks the peer the server is currently synchonizing to.
.PP
The contents of the host field may be one of four forms. It may be a
host name, an IP address, a reference clock implementation name with its
parameter or \*(L"REFCLK(<implementation number>, <parameter>)\*(R". On
\*(L"hostnames no\*(R" only IP\-addresses will be displayed.
.PP
.B dmpeers
.PP
A slightly different peer summary list. Identical to the output of the
.B peers
command except for the character in the leftmost column. Characters only
appear beside peers which were included in the final stage of the clock
selection algorithm. A \*(L".\*(R" indicates that this peer was cast off
in the falseticker detection, while a \*(L"+\*(R" indicates that the
peer made it through. A \*(L"*\*(R" denotes the peer the server is
currently synchronizing with.
.PP
.B showpeer
.I peer_address
[
.I addr2
] [
.I addr3
] [
.I addr4
]
.PP
Shows a detailed display of the current peer variables for one or more
peers. Most of these values are described in the NTP Version 2
specification.
.PP
.B pstats
.I peer_address
[
.I addr2
] [
.I addr3
] [
.I addr4
]
.PP
Show per\-peer statistic counters associated with the specified peer(s).
.PP
.B clockinfo
.I clock_peer_address
[
.I addr2
] [
.I addr3
] [
.I addr4
]
.PP
Obtain and print information concerning a peer clock. The values
obtained provide information on the setting of fudge factors and other
clock performance information.
.PP
.B kerninfo
.PP
Obtain and print kernel phase-lock loop operating parameters. This
information is available only if the kernel has been specially modified
for a precision timekeeping function.
.PP
.B loopinfo
[
.B oneline|multiline
]
.PP
Print the values of selected loop filter variables. The loop filter is
the part of NTP which deals with adjusting the local system clock. The
\*(L"offset\*(R" is the last offset given to the loop filter by the
packet processing code. The \*(L"frequency\*(R" is the frequency error
of the local clock in parts-per-million (ppm). The \*(L"time_const\*(R"
controls the "stiffness" of the phase-lock loop and thus the speed at
which it can adapt to oscillator drift. The \*(L"watchdog timer\*(R"
value is the number of seconds which have elapsed since the last sample
offset was given to the loop filter. The \*(L"oneline\*(R" and
\*(L"multiline\*(R" options specify the format in which this information
is to be printed, with \*(L"multiline\*(R" as the default.
.PP
.B sysinfo
.PP
Print a variety of system state variables, i.e. state related to the
local server. All except the last four lines are described in the NTP
Version 3 specification, RFC 1305. The \*(L"system flags\*(R" show
various system flags, some of which can be set and cleared by the
\*(L"enable\*(R" and \*(L"disable\*(R" configuration commands,
respectively. The \*(L"stability\*(R" is the residual frequency error
remaining after the system frequency correction is applied and is
intended for maintenance and debugging. In most architectures, this
value will initially decrease from as high as 500 ppm to a nominal value
in the range .01 to 0.1 ppm. If it remains high for some time after
starting the daemon, something may be wrong with the local clock, or the
value of the kernel variable \*(L"tick\*(R" may be incorrect. The
\*(L"broadcastdelay\*(R" shows the default broadcast delay, as set by
the \*(L"broadcastdelay\*(R" configuration command, while the
\*(L"authdelay\*(R" shows the default authentication delay, as set by
the \*(L"authdelay\*(R" configuration command.
.PP
.B sysstats
.PP
Print statistics counters maintained in the protocol module.
.PP
.B memstats
.PP
Print statistics counters related to memory allocation
code.
.PP
.B iostats
.PP
Print statistics counters maintained in the input\-output module.
.PP
.B timerstats
.PP
Print statistics counters maintained in the timer/event queue support
code.
.PP
.B reslist
.PP
Obtain and print the server's restriction list. This list is (usually)
printed in sorted order and may help to understand how the restrictions
are applied.
.PP
.B monlist
[
.I version
]
.PP
Obtain and print traffic counts collected and maintained by the monitor
facility. The version number should not normally need to be specified.
.PP
.B clkbug
.I clock_peer_address
[
.I addr2
] [
.I addr3
] [
.I addr4
]
.PP
Obtain debugging information for a reference clock driver. This
information is provided only by some clock drivers and is mostly
undecodable without a copy of the driver source in hand.
.SH RUNTIME CONFIGURATION REQUESTS
.PP
All requests which cause state changes in the server are authenticated
by the server using a configured NTP key (the facility can also be
disabled by the server by not configuring a key). The key number and the
corresponding key must also be made known to
.IR xtnpdc .
This can be done using the
.B keyid
and
.B passwd
commands, the latter of which will prompt at the terminal for a password
to use as the encryption key. You will also be prompted automatically
for both the key number and password the first time a command which
would result in an authenticated request to the server is given.
Authentication not only provides verification that the requester has
permission to make such changes, but also gives an extra degree of
protection again transmission errors.
.PP
Authenticated requests always include a timestamp in the packet data,
which is included in the computation of the authentication code. This
timestamp is compared by the server to its receive time stamp. If they
differ by more than a small amount the request is rejected. This is done
for two reasons. First, it makes simple replay attacks on the server, by
someone who might be able to overhear traffic on your LAN, much more
difficult. Second, it makes it more difficult to request configuration
changes to your server from topologically remote hosts. While the
reconfiguration facility will work well with a server on the local host,
and may work adequately between time\-synchronized hosts on the same
LAN, it will work very poorly for more distant hosts. As such, if
reasonable passwords are chosen, care is taken in the distribution and
protection of keys and appropriate source address restrictions are
applied, the run time reconfiguration facility should provide an
adequate level of security.
.PP
The following commands all make authenticated requests.
.PP
.B addpeer
.I peer_address
[
.I keyid
] [
.I version#
] [
.B prefer
]
.PP
Add a configured peer association at the given address and operating in
symmetric active mode. Note that an existing association with the same
peer may be deleted when this command is executed, or may simply be
converted to conform to the new configuration, as appropriate. If the
optional \*(L"keyid\*(R" is a nonzero integer, all outgoing packets to
the remote server will have an authentication field attached encrypted
with this key. If the value is 0 (or not given) no authentication will
be done. The \*(L"version#\*(R" can be 1, 2 or 3 and defaults to 3. The
\*(L"prefer\*(R" keyword indicates a preferred peer (and thus will be
used primarily for clock synchronisation if possible). The preferred
peer also determines the validity of the PPS signal - if the preferred
peer is suitable for synchronisation so is the PPS signal.
.PP
.B addserver
.I peer_address
[
.I keyid
] [
.I version#
] [
.B prefer
]
.PP
Identical to the
.B addpeer
command, except that the operating mode is client.
.PP
.B broadcast
.I peer_address
[
.I keyid
] [
.I version#
]
.PP
Identical to the
.B addpeer
command, except that the operating mode is broadcast. In this case a
valid key identifier and key are required. The \*(L"peer_address\*(R"
parameter can be the broadcast address of the local network or a
multicast group address assigned to NTP. If a multicast address, a
multicast-capable kernel is required.
.PP
.B unconfig
.I peer_address
[
.I addr2
] [
.I addr3
] [
.I addr4
]
.PP
This command causes the configured bit to be removed from the specified
peer(s). In many cases this will cause the peer association to be
deleted. When appropriate, however, the association may persist in an
unconfigured mode if the remote peer is willing to continue on in this
fashion.
.PP
.B fudge
.I peer_address
[
.I time1
] [
.I time2
] [
.I stratum
] [
.I refid
]
.PP
This command provides a way to set certain data for a reference clock.
See the source listing for further information.
.PP
.B enable auth|bclient|pll|monitor|stats
[
.I ...
]
.PP
Provides a way to enable various server options. Flags not mentioned are
unaffected. The \*(L"auth\*(R" flag causes the server to synchronize
with unconfigured peers only if the peer has been correctly
authenticated using a trusted key and key identifier. The default for
this flag is disable (off). The \*(L"bclient\*(R" flag causes the server
to listen for a message from a broadcast or multicast server, following
which an association is automatically instantiated for that server. The
default for this flag is disable (off). The \*(L"pll\*(R" flag enables
the server to adjust its local clock, with default enable (on). If not
set, the local clock free-runs at its intrinsic time and frequency
offset. This flag is useful in case the local clock is controlled by
some other device or protocol and NTP is used only to provide
synchronization to other clients. The \*(L"monitor\*(R" flag enables the
monitoring facility (see elsewhere), with default disable (off). The
\*(L"stats\*(R" flag enables statistics facility filegen (see
description elsewhere.), with default enable (on).
.PP
.B disable auth|bclient|pll|monitor|stats
[
.I ...
]
.PP
Provides a way to disable various server options. Flags not mentioned
are unaffected. The flags presently available are described under the
enable command.
.PP
.B restrict
.I address
.I mask
.I flag
[
.I flag
]
.PP
Causes flag(s) to be added to an existing restrict list entry, or adds a
new entry to the list with the specified flag(s). The possible choices
for the flags arguments are given in the following list:
.Ip ignore 10
Ignore all packets from hosts which match this entry. If this flag is
specified neither queries nor time server polls will be responded to.
.Ip noquery 10
Ignore all NTP mode 7 packets (i.e. information queries and
configuration requests) from the source. Time service is not affected.
.Ip nomodify 10
Ignore all NTP mode 7 packets which attempt to modify the state of the
server (i.e. run time reconfiguration). Queries which return information
are permitted.
.Ip notrap 10
Decline to provide mode 6 control message trap service to matching
hosts. The trap service is a subsystem of the mode 6 control message
protocol which is intended for use by remote event logging programs.
.Ip lowpriotrap 10
Declare traps set by matching hosts to be low priority. The number of
traps a server can maintain is limited (the current limit is 3). Traps
are usually assigned on a first come, first served basis, with later
trap requestors being denied service. This flag modifies the assignment
algorithm by allowing low priority traps to be overridden by later
requests for normal priority traps.
.Ip noserve 10
Ignore NTP packets whose mode is other than 7. In effect, time service
is denied, though queries may still be permitted.
.Ip nopeer 10
Provide stateless time service to polling hosts, but do not allocate
peer memory resources to these hosts even if they otherwise might be
considered useful as future synchronization partners.
.Ip notrust 10
Treat these hosts normally in other respects, but never use them as
synchronization sources.
.Ip limited 10
These hosts are subject to limitation of number of clients from the same
net. Net in this context refers to the IP notion of net (class A, class
B, class C, etc.). Only the first \*(L"client_limit\*(R" hosts that have
shown up at the server and that have been active during the last
\*(L"client_limit_period\*(R" seconds are accepted. Requests from other
clients from the same net are rejected. Only time request packets are
taken into account. \*(L"Private\*(R", \*(L"control\*(R", and
\*(L"broadcast\*(R" packets are not subject to client limitation and
therefore are not contributing to client count. History of clients is
kept using the monitoring capability of
.IR xntpd.
Thus, monitoring is active as long as there is a restriction entry with
the \*(L"limited\*(R" flag. The default value for \*(L"client_limit\*(R"
is 3. The default value for \*(L"client_limit_period\*(R" is 3600
seconds. Currently both variables are not runtime configurable.
.Ip ntpport 10
This is actually a match algorithm modifier, rather than a restriction
flag. Its presence causes the restriction entry to be matched only if
the source port in the packet is the standard NTP UDP port (123). Both
\*(L"ntpport\*(R" and non\-\*(L"ntpport\*(R" may be specified. The
\*(L"ntpport\*(R" is considered more specific and is sorted later in the
list.
.PP
.B unrestrict
.I address
.I mask
.I flag
[
.I flag
]
.PP
Remove the specified flag(s) from the restrict list entry indicated
by the
.I address
and
.I mask
arguments.
.PP
.B delrestrict
.I address
.I mask
[
.B ntpport
]
.PP
Delete the matching entry from the restrict list.
.PP
.B "monitor yes|no"
.PP
Enable or disable the monitoring facility. Note that a
.B "monitor no"
command followed by a
.B "monitor yes"
command is a good way of resetting the packet counts.
.PP
.B readkeys
.PP
Causes the current set of authentication keys to be purged and a new set
to be obtained by rereading the keys file (which must have been
specified in the
.I xntpd
configuration file). This allows encryption keys to be changed without
restarting the server.
.PP
.B trustkey
.I keyid
[
.I keyid
] [
.I keyid
] [
.I keyid
]
.PP
Adds one or more keys to the trusted key list. When authentication is
enabled, peers whose time is to be trusted must be authenticated using a
trusted key.
.PP
.B untrustkey
.I keyid
[
.I keyid
] [
.I keyid
] [
.I keyid
]
.PP
Removes one or more keys from the trusted key list.
.PP
.B authinfo
.PP
Returns information concerning the authentication module, including
known keys and counts of encryptions and decryptions which have been
done.
.PP
.B setprecision
.I precision_value
.PP
Sets the precision which the server advertises to the specified value.
This should be a negative integer in the range -4 through -20.
.PP
.B traps
.PP
Display the traps set in the server. See the source listing for further
information.
.PP
.B addtrap
.I address
[
.I port
] [
.I interface
]
.PP
Set a trap for asynchronous messages. See the source listing for further
information.
.PP
.B clrtrap
.I address
[
.I port
] [
.I interface
]
.PP
Clear a trap for asynchronous messages. See the source listing for
further information.
.PP
.B reset ...
.PP
Clear the statistics counters in various modules of the server. See the
source listing for further information.
.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
.IR xntpd (8)
.SH HISTORY
.PP
Written by Dennis Ferguson at the University of Toronto.
.SH BUGS
.PP
.I Xntpdc
is a crude hack. Much of the information it shows is deadly boring and
could only be loved by its implementer. The program was designed so that
new (and temporary) features were easy to hack in, at great expense to
the program's ease of use. Despite this, the program is occasionally
useful.
