.ig \"-*- nroff -*-
Copyright (C) 1994-2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.TH HPFTODIT @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
hpftodit \- create font description files for use with groff \-Tlj4
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B hpftodit
[
.B \-sv
]
[
.BI \-i n
]
.I tfm_file
.I map_file
.I font
.PP
It is possible to have whitespace between the
.B \-i
command line option and its parameter.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B hpftodit
creates a font file for use with
.B
groff \-Tlj4\fR
from an HP tagged font metric file.
.I tfm_file
is the name of the tagged font metric file for the font.
.I map_file
is a file giving the groff names for characters in the font;
this file should consist of a sequence of lines of the form:
.IP
.I
n c1 c2 \fR.\|.\|.
.LP
where
.I n
is a decimal integer giving the MSL number of the character,
and
.IR c1 ,
.IR c2 ,.\|.\|.
are the groff names of the character.
.I font
is the name of the groff font file.
The groff font file is written to
.IR font .
.LP
The
.B \-s
option should be given if the font is special
(a font is
.I special
if
.B troff
should search it whenever
a character is not found in the current font.)
If the font is special,
it should be listed in the
.B fonts
command in the DESC file;
if it is not special, there is no need to list it, since
.B troff
can automatically mount it when it's first used.
.LP
If the
.B \-i
option is used,
.B hpftodit
will automatically generate an italic correction,
a left italic correction and a subscript correction
for each character
(the significance of these parameters is explained in
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-v
Print the version number.
.TP
.B \-s
The font is special.
The effect of this option is to add the
.B special
command to the font file.
.TP
.BI \-i n
Generate an italic correction for each character so that 
the character's width plus the character's italic correction
is equal to
.I n
design units
plus the amount by which the right edge of the character's bounding
is to the right of the character's origin.
If this would result in a negative italic correction, use a zero
italic correction instead.
There are 8782 design units per em for Intellifont fonts.
.IP
Also generate a subscript correction equal to the 
product of the tangent of the slant of the font and
four fifths of the x-height of the font.
If this would result in a subscript correction greater than the italic
correction, use a subscript correction equal to the italic correction
instead.
.IP
Also generate a left italic correction for each character
equal to
.I n
design units
plus the amount by which the left edge of the character's bounding box
is to the left of the character's origin.
The left italic correction may be negative.
.IP
This option is normally needed only with italic (or oblique) fonts.
.SH FILES
.Tp \w'\fB@FONTDIR@/devlj4/DESC'u+2n
.B @FONTDIR@/devlj4/DESC
Device description file.
.TP
.BI @FONTDIR@/devlj4/ F
Font description file for font
.IR F .
.SH BUGS
.LP
This program was written without the benefit of complete, official
documentation on the tagged font metric format.
It is therefore likely that it will fail to work on tfm files that are
dissimilar to those for the internal fonts on the Laserjet 4,
with which it was tested:
.LP
TrueType tfm files are not supported.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR grolj4 (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)
