.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1994 Wilko Bulte
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 4, 2004
.Dt AHA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm aha
.Nd Adaptec SCSI host adapter driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device aha
.Cd device scbus
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.aha.0.at="isa"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver provides access to the
.Tn SCSI
bus connected to the Adaptec AHA-154x and AHA-1640 SCSI host adapters.
x is 0 for controllers without a floppy drive and 2 for controllers
that have them.
For optimum
performance, Adaptec AHA-174x controllers should be configured in
enhanced mode and attached via the
.Xr ahb 4
driver.
.Pp
One device hint entry for every card to be attached by the system is
required.
Specific values for the port address, IRQ, and DRQ may be specified.
If wildcard values are used, the driver will query the device for its
current settings and use those.
If the port address
is a wildcard, the driver consults an internal table of possible port address
locations and attaches to the first unattached card it finds.
The possible
port addresses for this card are 0x330, 0x334, 0x230, 0x234, 0x130, and
0x134.
.Pp
The AHA-1640 is an MCA bus card.
Since the MCA bus is a self-identifying bus, no setting of hints is
required.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following SCSI host adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Adaptec AHA-154xB
.It
Adaptec AHA-154xC
.It
Adaptec AHA-154xCF
.It
Adaptec AHA-154xCP
.It
Adaptec AHA-1640
.It
Adaptec AHA-174x in 154x emulation mode
.It
DTC 3290 SCSI controller in 1542 emulation mode
.It
Tekram SCSI controllers in 154x emulation mode
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ahb 4 ,
.Xr ahc 4 ,
.Xr aic 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.\"
.\" .Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.\"
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was ported by
.An M. Warner Losh
from the
.Nm bt
driver written by
.An Justin T. Gibbs .
.Sh BUGS
The AHA-154xA card does not support residuals on data transfers.
As a result, this card is no longer supported.
.Pp
There have been some reports that the AHA-154xB does not work well
under heavy load.
.Pp
The AHA-154xCP is a plug and play controller.
However, its resources are set using the on-board BIOS and cannot be
moved.
Failures to attached for this card are often caused when the resources
set in the BIOS conflict.
