.\" Copyright (c) 2003 David E. O'Brien
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Adaptec, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Manpage cleanup by: Jeroen Ruigrok van der Werven <asmodai@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 14, 2004
.Dt ASR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm asr
.Nd driver for Adaptec I2O based SCSI/ATA host bus adapters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device asr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Adaptec
.Nm
driver provides access to disks
and disk arrays controlled by I2O based host bus adapters and
SmartRAID SCSI RAID adapters through the standard SCSI disk
.Xr da 4
interface.
.Pp
The supported adapters provide 64 bit PCI,
Compact PCI, Zero Channel PCI,
and up to four channels of Ultra2, Ultra 160, or Ultra320 SCSI,
or two channels of 1GB Fibre.
All support RAID-0, RAID-1, RAID-10, RAID-5 and RAID-50 arrays.
All SCSI target types are supported.
For the ATA based controllers, one IDE drive per channel is supported.
Hot-swapping of IDE drives is not supported at this time.
.Pp
All host bus adapters must be configured
before they can be used with any operating system.
Please contact Adaptec directly to obtain the latest information
on configuration utilities for the adapters.
Currently there are both a Motif based GUI configuration utility
and a CLI based configuration utility available from the Adaptec Web site.
The cards and arrays can also be configured via the BIOS based configuration
tool (SMOR).
.Sh HARDWARE
The adapters currently supported by the
.Nm
driver include the following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Adaptec Zero-Channel SCSI RAID 2000S, 2005S, 2010S, 2015S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 2100S, 2110S
.It
Adaptec ATA-100 RAID 2400A
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 3200S, 3210S
.It
Adaptec SCSI RAID 3400S, 3410S
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM1554
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM1564
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM2554
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM2564
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM2664
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM2754
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM2865
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM3754
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM3755U2B / SmartRAID V Millennium
.It
Adaptec SmartRAID PM3757
.It
DEC KZPCC-AC (LVD 1-ch, 4MB or 16MB cache),
DEC KZPCC-CE (LVD 3-ch, 64MB cache),
DEC KZPCC-XC (LVD 1-ch, 16MB cache),
DEC KZPCC-XE (LVD 3-ch, 64MB cache) -- rebadged SmartRAID V Millennium
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/asr*" -compact
.It Pa /dev/asr*
Adaptec SCSI RAID control nodes
.El
.Sh NOTES
The ATA based controllers present their devices as SCSI-like devices via CAM.
For IDE drives attached to these cards, a subset of standard SCSI commands
and mode pages are understood via translation performed in the card's firmware.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr da 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
(Adaptec SCSI RAID)
driver first appeared as the dpti2o driver under BSDi
.Bsx 3.2 ,
then under
.Fx 2.2.8
and was ported over to the CAM layer represented in 4.0.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was kindly donated by Adaptec
and is maintained by
.An Mark Salyzyn Aq Mt mark_salyzyn@adaptec.com .
This manual page was written by
.An Mark Salyzyn
and fixed up by
.An Jeroen Ruigrok van der Werven Aq Mt asmodai@FreeBSD.org .
