.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2022 Bjoern A. Zeeb
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 22, 2023
.Dt ATH10K 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ath10k
.Nd Qualcomm Atheros IEEE 802.11ac wireless network driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
The driver will auto-load without any user interaction using
.Xr devmatch 8
if enabled in
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.Pp
Only if auto-loading is explicitly disabled, place the following
lines in
.Xr rc.conf 5
to manually load the driver as a module at boot time:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kld_list="${kld_list} if_ath10k"
.Ed
.Pp
It is discouraged to load the driver from
.Xr loader 8 .
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver is derived from Qualcomm Atheros' Linux ath10k driver and
provides support for the following PCI chipsets:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width Ds -offset indent -compact
.It QCA6174
.It QCA9377
.It QCA9887
.It QCA9888
.It QCA988X
.It QCA9984
.It QCA99X0
.El
.Pp
This driver requires firmware to be loaded before it will work.
The package
.Pa wifi-firmware-ath10k-kmod
from the
.Pa ports/net/wifi-firmware-ath10k-kmod
port needs to be installed before the driver is loaded.
Otherwise no
.Xr wlan 4
interface can be created using
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
The driver uses the
.\" No LinuxKPI man pages so no .Xr here.
.Em linuxkpi_wlan
and
.Em linuxkpi
compat framework to bridge between the Linux and
native
.Fx
driver code as well as to the native
.Xr net80211 4
wireless stack.
.Pp
While
.Nm
supports all 802.11 a/b/g/n and ac
the compatibility code currently only supports 802.11 a/b/g modes.
Support for 802.11 n/ac is to come.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 14.0 .
.Sh BUGS
Certainly.
