.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2002-2008 Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\" All rights reserved.
.\""
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce at minimum a disclaimer
.\"    similar to the "NO WARRANTY" disclaimer below ("Disclaimer") and any
.\"    redistribution must be conditioned upon including a substantially
.\"    similar Disclaimer requirement for further binary redistribution.
.\"
.\" NO WARRANTY
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF NONINFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTIBILITY
.\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"/
.Dd November 30, 2008
.Dt ATH_HAL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ath_hal
.Nd "Atheros Hardware Access Layer (HAL)"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ath_hal"
.Cd "options AH_SUPPORT_AR5416"
or
.Cd "device ath_ar5210"
.Cd "device ath_ar5211"
.Cd "device ath_ar5212"
.Cd "device ath_rf2413"
.Cd "device ath_rf2417"
.Cd "device ath_rf2425"
.Cd "device ath_rf5111"
.Cd "device ath_rf5112"
.Cd "device ath_rf5413"
.Cd "device ath_ar5416"
.\".Cd "device ath_ar5312"
.\".Cd "device ath_rf2136"
.\".Cd "device ath_rf2137"
.Cd "device ath_ar9160"
.Cd "options AH_SUPPORT_AR5416"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The hal provides hardware support for wireless network adapters based on
the Atheros AR5210, AR5211, AR5212, AR5416, and AR9160 chips.
This code is part of the
.Xr ath 4
driver but configured separately to allow fine-grained control
over the set of chips supported.
Selecting
.Nm
enables support for all PCI and Cardbus devices.
Note this includes AR5416 devices and must be accompanied by the
AH_SUPPORT_AR5416
option to enable the extended hardware descriptor format used by
AR5416 and later devices.
.Pp
Devices supported come in either Cardbus or mini-PCI packages.
.Pp
Historically this code has been released in a binary-only form
and packaged as a separate module.
With the release of source code for the hal this is no longer true
and the code is tightly integrated with the driver.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following cards are among those supported by the
.Nm
module:
.Pp
.Bl -column -compact "Samsung SWL-5200N" "AR5212" "Cardbus" "a/b/g"
.It Em "Card	Chip	Bus	Standard"
.It "Aztech WL830PC	AR5212	CardBus	b/g"
.It "D-Link DWL-A650	AR5210	CardBus	a"
.It "D-Link DWL-AB650	AR5211	CardBus	a/b"
.It "D-Link DWL-A520	AR5210	PCI	a"
.It "D-Link DWL-AG520	AR5212	PCI	a/b/g"
.It "D-Link DWL-AG650	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "D-Link DWL-G520B	AR5212	PCI	b/g"
.It "D-Link DWL-G650B	AR5212	CardBus	b/g"
.It "Elecom LD-WL54AG	AR5212	Cardbus	a/b/g"
.It "Elecom LD-WL54	AR5211	Cardbus	a"
.It "Fujitsu E5454	AR5212	Cardbus	a/b/g"
.It "Fujitsu FMV-JW481	AR5212	Cardbus	a/b/g"
.It "Fujitsu E5454	AR5212	Cardbus	a/b/g"
.It "HP NC4000	AR5212	PCI	a/b/g"
.It "I/O Data WN-AB	AR5212	CardBus	a/b"
.It "I/O Data WN-AG	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "I/O Data WN-A54	AR5212	CardBus	a"
.It "Linksys WMP55AG	AR5212	PCI	a/b/g"
.It "Linksys WPC51AB	AR5211	CardBus	a/b"
.It "Linksys WPC55AG	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "NEC PA-WL/54AG	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "Netgear WAG311	AR5212	PCI	a/b/g"
.It "Netgear WAB501	AR5211	CardBus	a/b"
.It "Netgear WAG511	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "Netgear WG311	AR5212	PCI	b/g"
.It "Netgear WG511T	AR5212	CardBus	b/g"
.It "Orinoco 8480	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "Orinoco 8470WD	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "Proxim Skyline 4030	AR5210	CardBus	a"
.It "Proxim Skyline 4032	AR5210	PCI	a"
.It "Samsung SWL-5200N	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.It "SMC SMC2735W	AR5210	CardBus	a"
.It "Sony PCWA-C700	AR5212	Cardbus	a/b"
.It "Sony PCWA-C300S	AR5212	Cardbus	b/g"
.It "Sony PCWA-C500	AR5210	Cardbus	a"
.It "3Com 3CRPAG175	AR5212	CardBus	a/b/g"
.El
.Pp
An up to date list can be found at
.Pa http://customerproducts.atheros.com/customerproducts .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ath 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module first appeared in
.Fx 5.2 .
.Sh BUGS
See
.Xr ath 4
for known bugs.
