.\"     $NetBSD: awi.4,v 1.6 2000/03/22 11:24:33 onoe Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 31, 1999
.Dt AWI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm awi
.Nd "AMD PCnetMobile IEEE 802.11 PCMCIA wireless network driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device awi"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports various IEEE 802.11 wireless cards
which run AMD PCnetMobile firmware based on AMD 79c930 controller
with Intersil (formerly Harris) PRISM radio chipset.
It provides access to 32kb of memory shared between the controller
and the host.
All host/device interaction is via this shared memory, which can be
accessed either via PCMCIA memory space or I/O space.
The
.Nm
driver encapsulates all IP and ARP traffic as 802.11 frames.
.Pp
The driver works both in infrastructure mode and in adhoc (independent
BSS) mode.
.Pp
In infrastructure mode, it communicates with an Access Point
which serves as a link-layer bridge between an Ethernet and
the wireless network.  An access point also provides roaming capability
which allows wireless node to move between access points.
.Pp
In adhoc mode, it communicates peer to peer.
Though it is more efficient to communicate between wireless nodes,
the coverage is limited spatially due to lack of roaming capability.
.Pp
In addition to these two mode in IEEE 802.11 specification, the
.Nm
driver also supports a variant of adhoc mode out of spec for DS radio cards,
which makes possible to communicate with adhoc mode of
.Xr wi 8
driver.  The NWID doesn't affect in this mode.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8
and
.Xr ifmedia 4 .
.Sh HARDWARE
Cards supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width BayStack_650x -offset indent
.It BayStack 650
1Mbps Frequency Hopping PCCARD adapter
.It BayStack 660
2Mbps Direct Sequence PCCARD adapter
.It Icom SL-200
2Mbps Direct Sequence PCCARD adapter
.It Melco WLI-PCM
2Mbps Direct Sequence PCCARD adapter
.It NEL SSMagic
2Mbps Direct Sequence PCCARD adapter
.It Netwave AirSurfer Plus
1Mbps Frequency Hopping PCCARD adapter
.It Netwave AirSurfer Pro
2Mbps Direct Sequence PCCARD adapter
.El
.Pp
The original Xircom Netwave AirSurfer is supported by the
.Xr cnw 4
driver.
.Sh MEDIA SELECTION
The DS cards support
.Em DS1
and
.Em DS2
media types, while the FH cards support
.Em FH1
media type.  For each media type,
.Em adhoc
mediaopt can be used to indicate the driver to operate in adhoc mode.
For DS radio cards,
.Em adhoc , Ns Em flag0
mediaopt can be used for
.Xr wi 4
compatible adhoc mode.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "awi0: unable to allocate memory space; using i/o only"
Indicates that the driver was not able to allocate 32kb of PCMCIA bus
address space into which to map the device; the driver will use the
(slightly slower) i/o-space only access methods to read and write to
the shared memory.  Since by default,
.Nx ,
only allocates 16kb of
address space per PCMCIA controller, this message is in some sense to
be expected and should not be a cause for alarm.
See
.Xr pcmcia 4
for information on how to increase the memory available to the PCMCIA
controller.
.It "awi0: failed to complete selftest (%s)"
The device failed to complete its self test.
.It "awi0: synced with no-bssid at channel %d"
The device is ready to relay traffic at specified channel.
.It "awi0: synced with %s ssid %s at channel %d"
The device has successfully synchronized with at least one of the
identified stations and is ready to relay traffic.
.It "awi0: associated with %s ssid %s channel %d signal %d"
The device has successfully synchronized with the identified Access
Point and is ready to relay traffic.
.It "awi0: authentication failed (reason %d)"
.It "awi0: association failed (reason %d)"
The access point refuses the association request from the device.
.It "awi0: no recent beacons from %s; rescanning"
The device has not heard a beacon from its currently associated Access
Point recently, and is looking for a new access point.
.It "awi0: transmit timeout"
The device failed to generate an interrupt to acknowledge a
transmitted packet.
.It "awi0: failed to lock interrupt"
The system was unable to obtain the lock to access shared memory.
.It "awi0: command %d failed %x"
The device failed to complete the request from the system.
.El
.Sh BUGS
Doesn't create IBSS itself.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cnw 4 ,
.Xr ifmedia 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pcmcia 4 ,
.Xr wi 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T Am79C930 PCnet Mobile Single-Chip Wireless LAN Media Access Controller
.%O http://www.amd.com
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The initial version of the
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Sommerfeld Aq sommerfeld@netbsd.org .
Then the
.Nm
driver module completely rewritten to support cards with DS phy and
to support adhoc mode by
.An Atsushi Onoe Aq onoe@netbsd.org .
