.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999, 2000-2003
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@windriver.com>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 20, 2003
.Dt AXE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm axe
.Nd ASIX Electronics AX88172 USB Ethernet driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ehci"
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device axe"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for USB ethernet adapters based on the ASIX
Electronics AX88172 USB 2.0 chipset, including the following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
D-Link DUBE100
.It
LinkSys USB200M
.It
Netgear FA120
.El
.Pp
The AX88172 is a USB 2.0 device which contains a 10/100
ethernet MAC with MII interface and is designed to work with both
ethernet and HomePNA transceivers.
The AX88172 will operate with
both USB 1.x and USB 2.0 controllers, however performace with 1.x
contollers will be limited since the USB 1.x standard specifies a
maximum transfer speed of 12Mbps.
Users with USB 1.x controllers should therefore not expect to actually
achieve 100Mbps speeds with these devices.
.Pp
The AX88172 supports a 64-bit multicast hash table, single perfect
filter entry for the station address, all-multicast mode and promiscuous mode.
Packets are
received and transmitted over separate USB bulk transfer endpoints.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to enable
.Cm full-duplex
operation.
Not specifying
.Cm full-duplex
implies
.Cm half-duplex
mode.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (fast ethernet) operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to enable
.Cm full-duplex
operation.
Not specifying
.Cm full-duplex
implies
.Cm half-duplex
mode.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
The interface will operate in
half duplex mode if this media option is not specified.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "axe%d: watchdog timeout"
A packet was queued for transmission and a transmit command was
issued, however the device failed to acknowledge the transmission
before a timeout expired.
.It "axe%d: no memory for rx list"
The driver failed to allocate an mbuf for the receiver ring.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Rs
.%T "ASIX AX88172 data sheet"
.%O http://www.asix.com.tw
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq wpaul@windriver.com .
