.\"Copyright (c) 2006 Broadcom Corporation
.\" David Christensen <davidch@broadcom.com>.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\"are met:
.\"
.\"1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"   notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"   documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"3. Neither the name of Broadcom Corporation nor the name of its contributors
.\"   may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written consent.
.\"
.\"THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS'
.\"AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\"ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\"BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\"CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\"SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\"INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\"CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\"ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\"THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 4, 2006
.Dt BCE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bce
.Nd "Broadcom NetXtreme II (BCM5706/BCM5708) PCI/PCIe Gigabit Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device bce"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_bce_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports Broadcom's NetXtreme II product family, including the 
BCM5706 and BCM5708 Ethernet controllers.
.Pp
The NetXtreme II product family is composed of various Converged NIC (or CNIC) 
Ethernet controllers which support a TCP Offload Engine (TOE), Remote DMA (RDMA), 
and iSCSI acceleration, in addition to standard L2 Ethernet traffic, all on the 
same controller.
The following features are supported in the 
.Nm
driver under FreeBSD:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
IP/TCP/UDP checksum offload
Jumbo frames (up to 9022 bytes)
VLAN tag stripping
Interrupt coalescing
10/100/1000Mbps operation in full-duplex mode
10/100Mbps operation in half-duplex mode
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Ic mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseTX
Set 1000baseTX operation over twisted pair.
Only
.Cm full-duplex
mode is supported.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various NICs based on the Broadcom NetXtreme II
family of Gigabit Ethernet controllers, including the
following:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
HP NC370T Multifunction Gigabit Server Adapter
.It
HP NC370i Multifunction Gigabit Server Adapter
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "bce%d: PCI memory allocation failed!"
The driver has encountered a fatal initialization error.
.It "bce%d: PCI map interrupt failed!"
The driver has encountered a fatal initialization error.
.It "bce%d: Unsupported controller revision (%c%d)"
The driver does not support the controller revision in use.
.It "bce%d: SerDes controllers are not supported!"
The driver does not currently support SerDes/Fiber versions of the 
NetXtreme II controller.
.It "bce%d: Controller initialization failed!"
The driver has encountered a fatal initialization error.
.It "bce%d: NVRAM test failed!"
The driver could not access the controller NVRAM correctly.
.It "bce%d: DMA resource allocation failed!"
The driver could not allocate DMA memory to setup the controllers
host memory data structures.
.It "bce%d: Interface allocation failed!"
The driver could not create a network interface for the controller.
.It "bce%d: PHY probe failed!"
The driver could not access the PHY used by the controller.
.It "bce%d: Failed to setup IRQ!"
The driver could not initialize the IRQ handler.
.It "bce%d: Error: PHY read timeout!"
The driver could not read a PHY register before the timeout period expired.
.It "bce%d: PHY write timeout!"
The driver could not write to the PHY register because a timeout occurred.
.It "bce%d: Timeout error reading NVRAM at offset 0x%08X!"
The driver could not write to NVRAM because a timeout occurred.
.It "bce%d: Unknown Flash NVRAM found!"
The driver does not recognize the NVRAM device being used and therefore
cannot access it correctly.
.It "bce%d: Invalid NVRAM magic value!"
The driver cannot read NVRAM or the NVRAM is corrupt.
.It "bce%d: Invalid Manufacturing Information NVRAM CRC!"
The driver cannot read NVRAM or the NVRAM is corrupt.
.It "bce%d: Invalid Feature Configuration Information NVRAM CRC!"
The driver cannot read NVRAM or the NVRAM is corrupt.
.It "bce%d: DMA mapping error!"
The driver was unable to map memory into DMA addressable space required
by the controller.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate parent DMA tag!"
The driver could not allocate a PCI compatible DMA tag.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate status block DMA tag!"
The driver could not allocate a DMA tag for the controller's
status block.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate status block DMA memory!"
The driver could not allocate DMA addressable memory for the controller's
status block.
.It "bce_d: Could not map status block DMA memory!"
The driver could not map the status block memory into the controller's DMA
address space.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate statistics block DMA tag!"
The driver could not allocate a DMA tag for the controller's
statistics block.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate statistics block DMA memory!"
The driver could not allocate DMA addressable memory for the controller's
statistics block.
.It "bce%d: Could not map statistics block DMA memory!"
The driver could not map the statistics block memory into the controller's DMA
address space.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate TX descriptor chain DMA tag!"
The driver could not allocate a DMA tag for the controller's
TX chain.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate TX descriptor chain DMA memory!
The driver could not allocate DMA addressable memory for the controller's
TX chain.
.It "bce%d: Could not map TX descriptor chain DMA memory!"
The driver could not map the TX descriptor chain memory into the controller's DMA
address space.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate TX mbuf DMA tag!"
The driver could not allocate a DMA tag for the controller's
TX mbuf memory.
.It "bce%d: Unable to create TX mbuf DMA map!"
The driver could not map the TX mbuf memory into the controller's DMA
address space.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate RX descriptor chain DMA tag!"
The driver could not allocate a DMA tag for the controller's
RX chain.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate RX descriptor chain "
The driver could not allocate DMA addressable memory for the controller's
RX chain.
.It "bce%d: Could not map RX descriptor chain DMA memory!"
The driver could not map the RX descriptor chain memory into the controller's DMA
address space.
.It "bce%d: Could not allocate RX mbuf DMA tag!"
The driver could not allocate a DMA tag for the controller's
RX mbuf memory.
.It "bce%d: Unable to create RX mbuf DMA map!"
The driver could not map the RX mbuf memory into the controller's DMA
address space.
.It "bce%d: Firmware synchronization timeout!"
The driver was not able to synchronize with the firmware running on the
controller.
The firmware may be stopped or hung.
.It "bce%d: Invalid Ethernet address!"
The driver was not able to read a vaild Ethernet MAC address from NVRAM.
.It "bce%d: Reset failed!"
The driver has encountered a fatal initialization error.
.It "bce%d: Byte swap is incorrect!"
The driver has encountered a fatal initialization error.
Contact the author
with details of the CPU architecture and system chipset in use.
.It "bce%d: Firmware did not complete initialization!"
The driver has encountered a fatal initialization error.
.It "bce%d: Bootcode not running!"
The driver has encountered a fatal initialization error.
.It "bce%d: Error mapping mbuf into RX chain!"
The driver could not map a RX mbuf into DMA addressable memory.
.It "bce%d: Error filling RX chain: rx_bd[0x%04X]!"
The driver was unable to allocate enough mbufs to fill the RX chain
during initialization.
Try increasing the number of mbufs available in
the system, increase system memory, or if using jumbo frames, make sure
enough 9KB mbufs are available.
.It "bce%d: Failed to allocate new mbuf, incoming frame dropped!"
The driver was unable to allocate a new mbuf for the RX chain and reused
the mbuf for the received frame, dropping the incoming frame in the process.
Try increasing the number of mbufs available in the system or increase system
memory.
.It "bce%d: Controller reset failed!"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "bce%d: Controller initialization failed!"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "bce%d: Block initialization failed!"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "bce%d: Error mapping mbuf into TX chain!"
The driver could not map a TX mbuf into DMA addressable memory.
.It "bce%d: Error registering poll function!"
The driver received an error while attempting to register the poll function.
.It "bce%d: Changing VLAN_MTU not supported."
Changing the VLAN MTU is not currently supported by the driver.
.It "bce%d: Cannot change VLAN_HWTAGGING while management firmware (ASF/IPMI/UMP) is running!"
Management firmware to support ASF/IPMI/UMP requires that VLAN
tag stripping be enabled in the controller.
.It "bce%d: Changing VLAN_HWTAGGING not supported!"
Disabling VLAN tag stripping is not currently supported by the driver.
.It "bce%d: Watchdog timeout occurred, resetting!"
The device has stopped responding to the network, there is a problem
with the cable connection, or a driver logic problem has occurred..
.It "bce%d: Fatal attention detected: 0x%08X!"
A controller hardware failure has occurred.
If the problem continues replace the controller.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 6.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An David Christensen Aq davidch@broadcom.com .
