.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 SRI International
.\" Copyright (c) 2012 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract (FA8750-10-C-0237)
.\" ("CTSRD"), as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 1, 2014
.Dt BERIROM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm berirom
.Nd driver for BERI hardware information ROM
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device berirom"
.Pp
In
.Pa sys/boot/fdt/dts/mips/beri.dts :
.Cd berirom@0x7f00a000 {
.Cd compatible = "sri-cambridge,berirom";
.Cd reg = <0x7f00a000 0x1000>;
.Cd };
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device driver provides read access to the BERI hardware information ROM
at
/Pa /dev/berirom%d
and for the first (usually only) instance at
.Pa /dev/berirom .
The
.Nm
device also parses and prints the CPU build time and Subversion revision
of the CPU on attach.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr read 2
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver and this manual page were
developed by SRI International and the University of Cambridge Computer
Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract
.Pq FA8750-10-C-0237
.Pq Do CTSRD Dc ,
as part of the DARPA CRASH research programme.
This device driver was written by
.An Brooks Davis .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
currently requires that
.Fn read
calls to request no more data than is available (currently 20 bytes) and
that reads by on 4 byte boundaries.
