.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" Written by Tom Rhodes
.\" This file is in the public domain.
.\"
.Dd November 3, 2005
.Dt CISS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ciss
.Nd Common Interface for SCSI-3 Support driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device ciss"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver claims to provide a common interface between generic SCSI
transports and intelligent host adapters.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports
.Em CISS
as defined in the document entitled
.%T "CISS Command Interface for SCSI-3 Support Open Specification, Version 1.04, Valence Number 1" ,
dated 2000/11/27, produced by Compaq Computer Corporation.
.Pp
We provide a shim layer between the
.Nm
interface and
.Xr CAM 4 ,
offloading most of the queueing and being-a-disk chores onto CAM.
Entry to the driver is via the PCI bus attachment
.Fn ciss_probe ,
.Fn ciss_attach ,
etc.\& and via the CAM interface
.Fn ciss_cam_action ,
and
.Fn ciss_cam_poll .
The Compaq
.Nm
adapters require faked responses to get reasonable
behavior out of them.
In addition, the
.Nm
command set is by no means adequate to support the functionality
of a RAID controller,
and thus the supported Compaq adapters utilize portions of the
control protocol from earlier Compaq adapter families.
.Pp
Currently
.Nm
only supports the
.Dq simple
transport layer over PCI.
This interface (ab)uses the I2O register set (specifically the post
queues) to exchange commands with the adapter.
Other interfaces are available, but we are not supposed to know about them,
and it is dubious whether they would provide major performance improvements
except under extreme load.
.Pp
Non-disk devices (such as internal DATs and devices
attached to the external SCSI bus) are supported as normal CAM devices
provided that they are exported by the controller firmware and are not
marked as being masked.
Masked devices can be exposed by setting the
.Va hw.ciss.expose_hidden_physical
tunable to non-zero at boot time.
Direct Access devices (such as disk
drives) are only exposed as
.Xr pass 4
devices.
Hot-insertion and removal of devices is supported but a bus
rescan might be necessary.
.Sh HARDWARE
Controllers supported by the
.Nm
driver include:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Compaq Smart Array 5300
.It
Compaq Smart Array 532
.It
Compaq Smart Array 5i
.It
HP Smart Array 5312
.It
HP Smart Array 6i
.It
HP Smart Array 641
.It
HP Smart Array 642
.It
HP Smart Array 6400
.It
HP Smart Array 6400 EM
.It
HP Smart Array E400
.It
HP Smart Array P600
.It
HP Smart Array P800
.It
HP Modular Smart Array 20 (MSA20)
.It
HP Modular Smart Array 500 (MSA500)
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr pass 4 ,
.Xr xpt 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.Rs
.%T "CISS Command Interface for SCSI-3 Support Open Specification, Version 1.04, Valence Number 1"
.%D 2000/11/27
.%Q "Compaq Computer Corporation"
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Mike Smith Aq msmith@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This manual page is based on his comments and was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
