.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 28, 2004
.Dt CM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cm
.Nd SMC Arcnet Ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device isa
.Cd device cm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn Arcnet
.Tn ISA
network adapters.
.Pp
This driver also has quirks preset in the
.Xr device.hints 5
file for card detection.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following
card models:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
SMC90c26
.It
SMC90c56
.It
SMC90c66 in '56 compatibility mode.
.El
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
When the
.Va NOARP
flag is set on the
.Nm
interface,
it does not employ the address resolution protocol described in
.Xr arp 4
to dynamically map between Internet and Ethernet addresses on
the local network.
Instead it uses the least significant 8 bits of the
.Tn IP
address as the hardware address
like described in
.Tn RFC
1051
and
.Tn RFC
1201.
.Pp
With the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag cleared
.Tn IP/ARP/RARP
encoding is done according to
.Tn RFC
1201
that is, with Packet Header Definition Standard header and packet type
212 / 213.
The
.Tn MTU
is normally 1500.
The
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag is cleared by default.
.Pp
With the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag set,
.Tn IP
and
.Tn ARP
encoding is done according to the deprecated
.Tn RFC
1051 encoding, that is with simple header, packet type 240 / 241,
and the
.Tn MTU
is 507.
.Pp
When switching between the two modes, use
.Dl ifconfig interfacename down up
to switch the
.Tn MTU .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following driver specific error messages
may be reported:
.Bl -diag
.It "reset: card reset, link addr = 0x%02x (cm%d)"
The card is being reset and a new link address assigned.
.It "srint: restarted rx on buf cm%d"
The rx buffer has been emptied and will be reset.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr device.hints 5 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr watchdog 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device was ported from
.Nx
by
.An Max Khon Aq fjoe@FreeBSD.org
and first appeared in
.Fx 4.6 .
This manual page first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
The
.Sx IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
section was submitted by
.An Max Khon Aq fjoe@FreeBSD.org
and originated from
.Nx .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver code could do with a bit of improvement,
it would be nice if some one could come along and take care of this.
.Pp
The
.Sx IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
section is specific to all Arcnet
devices (see
.Pa sys/net/if_arcsubr.c )
and should be moved to a more generic location.
