.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Dag-Erling Coïdan Smørgrav
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 13, 2007
.Dt CORETEMP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm coretemp
.Nd device driver for Intel Core on-die digital thermal sensor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device coretemp"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
coretemp_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the on-die digital thermal sensor present
in Intel Core and newer CPUs.
.Pp
The values are exposed through the
.Dv HW_SENSORS
.Xr sysctl 3
tree.
For example:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
%sysctl hw.sensors
hw.sensors.cpu0.temp0: 28.00 degC
hw.sensors.cpu1.temp0: 29.00 degC
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr sysctl 3 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Rui Paulo Aq rpaulo@FreeBSD.org
as part of a Google Summer of Code project.
This manual page was written by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@FreeBSD.org .
