.\" Copyright (c) 2011-2016, Chelsio Inc
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Chelsio Inc nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 22, 2016
.Dt CXGBEV 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cxgbev
.Nd "Chelsio T4 and T5 based 40Gb, 10Gb, and 1Gb Ethernet VF driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device cxgbe"
.Cd "device cxgbev"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_cxgbev_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Virtual Functions on PCI Express Ethernet adapters
based on the Chelsio Terminator 4 and Terminator 5 ASICs (T4 and T5).
The driver supports Jumbo Frames, Transmit/Receive checksum offload,
TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO), VLAN
tag insertion/extraction, VLAN checksum offload, VLAN TSO, and
Receive Side Steering (RSS).
For further hardware information and questions related to hardware
requirements, see
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
Note that ports of T5 VFs are named cxlv and attach to a t5vf parent device
(in contrast to ports named cxgbev that attach to a t4vf parent for a T4 VF).
Loader tunables with the hw.cxgbe prefix apply to both T4 and T5 VFs.
The Physical Function driver for T4 and T5 adapters shares these tunables.
The sysctl MIBs are at dev.t5vf and dev.cxlv for T5 cards and at dev.t4vf and
dev.cxgbev for T4 cards.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Virtual Functions on 40Gb, 10Gb and 1Gb Ethernet adapters
based on the T5 ASIC:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Chelsio T580-CR
.It
Chelsio T580-LP-CR
.It
Chelsio T580-LP-SO-CR
.It
Chelsio T560-CR
.It
Chelsio T540-CR
.It
Chelsio T540-LP-CR
.It
Chelsio T522-CR
.It
Chelsio T520-LL-CR
.It
Chelsio T520-CR
.It
Chelsio T520-SO
.It
Chelsio T520-BT
.It
Chelsio T504-BT
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports Virtual Functions on 10Gb and 1Gb Ethernet adapters based
on the T4 ASIC:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Chelsio T420-CR
.It
Chelsio T422-CR
.It
Chelsio T440-CR
.It
Chelsio T420-BCH
.It
Chelsio T440-BCH
.It
Chelsio T440-CH
.It
Chelsio T420-SO
.It
Chelsio T420-CX
.It
Chelsio T420-BT
.It
Chelsio T404-BT
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.cxgbe.ntxq10g
The number of tx queues to use for a 10Gb or 40Gb port.
The default is 16 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nrxq10g
The number of rx queues to use for a 10Gb or 40Gb port.
The default is 8 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.ntxq1g
The number of tx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default is 4 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.nrxq1g
The number of rx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default is 2 or the number
of CPU cores in the system, whichever is less.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_timer_idx_10G
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_timer_idx_1G
The timer index value to use to delay interrupts.
The holdoff timer list has the values 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, and 200
by default (all values are in microseconds) and the index selects a
value from this list.
The default value is 1 which means the timer value is 5us.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values at any time via the
dev.cxgbev.X.holdoff_tmr_idx or dev.cxlv.X.holdoff_tmr_idx sysctl.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_pktc_idx_10G
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_pktc_idx_1G
The packet-count index value to use to delay interrupts.
The packet-count list has the values 1, 8, 16, and 32 by default
and the index selects a value from this list.
The default value is -1 which means packet counting is disabled and interrupts
are generated based solely on the holdoff timer value.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values via the
dev.cxgbev.X.holdoff_pktc_idx or dev.cxlv.X.holdoff_pktc_idx sysctl.
This sysctl works only when the interface has never been marked up (as done by
ifconfig up).
.It Va hw.cxgbe.qsize_txq
The size, in number of entries, of the descriptor ring used for a tx
queue.
A buf_ring of the same size is also allocated for additional
software queuing.
See
.Xr ifnet 9 .
The default value is 1024.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values via the
dev.cxgbev.X.qsize_txq sysctl or dev.cxlv.X.qsize_txq sysctl.
This sysctl works only when the interface has never been marked up (as done by
ifconfig up).
.It Va hw.cxgbe.qsize_rxq
The size, in number of entries, of the descriptor ring used for an
rx queue.
The default value is 1024.
Different interfaces can be assigned different values via the
dev.cxgbev.X.qsize_rxq or dev.cxlv.X.qsize_rxq sysctl.
This sysctl works only when the interface has never been marked up (as done by
ifconfig up).
.It Va hw.cxgbe.interrupt_types
The interrupt types that the driver is allowed to use.
Bit 0 represents INTx (line interrupts), bit 1 MSI, bit 2 MSI-X.
The default is 7 (all allowed).
The driver will select the best possible type out of the allowed types by
itself.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.fl_pktshift
The number of bytes of padding inserted before the beginning of an Ethernet
frame in the receive buffer.
The default value of 2 ensures that the Ethernet payload (usually the IP header)
is at a 4 byte aligned address.
0-7 are all valid values.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.fl_pad
A non-zero value ensures that writes from the hardware to a receive buffer are
padded up to the specified boundary.
The default is -1 which lets the driver pick a pad boundary.
0 disables trailer padding completely.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.buffer_packing
Allow the hardware to deliver multiple frames in the same receive buffer
opportunistically.
The default is -1 which lets the driver decide.
0 or 1 explicitly disable or enable this feature.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.allow_mbufs_in_cluster
1 allows the driver to lay down one or more mbufs within the receive buffer
opportunistically.
This is the default.
0 prohibits the driver from doing so.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.largest_rx_cluster
.It Va hw.cxgbe.safest_rx_cluster
Sizes of rx clusters.
Each of these must be set to one of the sizes available
(usually 2048, 4096, 9216, and 16384) and largest_rx_cluster must be greater
than or equal to safest_rx_cluster.
The defaults are 16384 and 4096 respectively.
The driver will never attempt to allocate a receive buffer larger than
largest_rx_cluster and will fall back to allocating buffers of
safest_rx_cluster size if an allocation larger than safest_rx_cluster fails.
Note that largest_rx_cluster merely establishes a ceiling -- the driver is
allowed to allocate buffers of smaller sizes.
.El
.Pp
Certain settings and resources for Virtual Functions are dictated
by the parent Physical Function driver.
For example, the Physical Function driver limits the number of queues a
Virtual Function is permitted to use.
Some of these limits can be adjusted in the firmware configuration file
used with the Physical Function driver.
.Pp
The PAUSE settings on the port of a Virtual Function are inherited from
the settings of the same port on the Physical Function.
Virtual Functions cannot modify the setting and track changes made to
the associated port's setting by the Physical Function driver.
.Pp
Receive queues on a Virtual Function always drop packets in response to
congestion
.Po
equivalent to setting
.Va hw.cxgbe.cong_drop
to 1
.Pc .
.Pp
The VF driver currently depends on the PF driver.
As a result, loading the VF driver will also load the PF driver as a
dependency.
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Chelsio support website at:
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
If an issue is identified with this driver with a supported adapter,
email all the specific information related to the issue to
.Aq Mt support@chelsio.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cxgbe 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 12.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Navdeep Parhar Aq Mt np@FreeBSD.org
and
.An John Baldwin Aq Mt jhb@FreeBSD.org .
