.\" Copyright (c) 2011, Chelsio Inc
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Chelsio Inc nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 14, 2011
.Dt CXGBE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cxgbe
.Nd "Chelsio T4 10Gb and 1Gb Ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device cxgbe"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_cxgbe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Express Ethernet adapters based on
the Chelsio Terminator 4 (T4) ASIC.
The driver supprts Jumbo Frames, Transmit/Receive checksum offload,
TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO), VLAN
tag insertion/extraction, VLAN checksum offload, VLAN TSO, and
Receive Side Steering (RSS).

For further hardware information and questions related to hardware
requirements, see
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports 10Gb and 1Gb Ethernet adapters based on the T4 ASIC:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Chelsio T420-CR
.It
Chelsio T422-CR
.It
Chelsio T440-CR
.It
Chelsio T420-BCH
.It
Chelsio T440-BCH
.It
Chelsio T440-CH
.It
Chelsio T420-SO
.It
Chelsio T420-CX
.It
Chelsio T420-BT
.It
Chelsio T404-BT
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.cxgbe.max_ntxq_10G_port
The maximum number of tx queues to use for a 10Gb port.
The default value is 8.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.max_nrxq_10G_port
The maximum number of rx queues to use for a 10Gb port.
The default value is 8.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.max_ntxq_1G_port
The maximum number of tx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default value is 2.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.max_nrxq_1G_port
The maximum number of rx queues to use for a 1Gb port.
The default value is 2.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_timer_idx_10G
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_timer_idx_1G
The timer index value to use to delay interrupts.
The holdoff timer list has the values 1, 5, 10, 50, 100, and 200
by default (all values are in microseconds) and the index selects a
value from this list.
The default value is 1 for both 10Gb and 1Gb ports, which means the
timer value is 5us.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_pktc_idx_10G
.It Va hw.cxgbe.holdoff_pktc_idx_1G
The packet-count index value to use to delay interrupts.
The packet-count list has the values 1, 8, 16, and 32 by default
and the index selects a value from this list.
The default value is 2 for both 10Gb and 1Gb ports, which means 16
packets (or the holdoff timer going off) before an interrupt is
generated.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.qsize_txq
The size, in number of entries, of the descriptor ring used for a tx
queue.
A buf_ring of the same size is also allocated for additional
software queuing.  See
.Xr ifnet 9 .
The default value is 1024.
.It Va hw.cxgbe.qsize_rxq
The size, in number of entries, of the descriptor ring used for an
rx queue.
The default value is 1024.
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the Chelsio support website at:
.Pa http://www.chelsio.com/ .
.Pp
If an issue is identified with this driver with a supported adapter,
email all the specific information related to the issue to
.Aq support@chelsio.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cxgb 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 9.0
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Navdeep Parhar Aq np@FreeBSD.org .
