.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 David E. O'Brien
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 19, 1997
.Dt DE 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm de
.Nd
DEC DC21x4x Ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device de0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Ethernet adapters based on the Digital
Equipment DC21x4x based self-contained Ethernet chips.
.Pp
It supports the DEC PCI DE435 card, DEC EISA DE425, DEC DE450, SMC 9332,
ZNYX ZX314, and others based on the 21040 and 21041 Ethernet controllers or
the 21140[A] Fast 100Base-T Ethernet controller.
.Pp
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "de%d: waking device from sleep/snooze mode"
The 21041 and 21140A chips support suppending the operation of the card.
.It "de%d: error: desired IRQ of %d does not match device's actual IRQ of %d"
The device probe detected that the board is configured for a different 
interrupt than the one specified in the kernel configuration file.
.It "de%d: not configured; limit of %d reached or exceeded"
There is a limit of 32
.Nm
devices allowed in a single machine.
.It "de%d: not configured; 21040 pass 2.0 required (%d.%d found)"
.It "de%d: not configured; 21140 pass 1.1 required (%d.%d found)"
Certain revisions of the chipset are not supported by this driver.
.El
.Pp
.Sh CAVEATS
Since the 21040 is available on both EISA and PCI boards, one must be careful
in how defines the 21040 in the kernel config file.
.Pp
.Sh BUGS
Currently the driver does not support multicast.
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
device driver was written by Matt Thomas.
This manual page was written by David E. O'Brien.
