.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Justin T. Gibbs
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 16, 1998
.Dt DPT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dpt
.Nd DPT RAID Controller SCSI driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For one or more EISA Controllers
.Cd "device eisa"
.Cd "device dpt"
.Pp
For one or more PCI Controllers
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device dpt"
.Pp
To allow PCI adapters to use memory mapped I/O if enabled:
.Cd options DPT_ALLOW_MEMIO
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the following RAID adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
DPT Smart Cache Plus
.It
Smart Cache II (PM2?2?, PM2022 [EISA], PM2024/PM2124 [PCI]) (Gen2)
.It
Smart RAID II (PM3?2?, PM3021, PM3222)
.It
Smart Cache III (PM2?3?)
.It
Smart RAID III (PM3?3?, PM3332 [EISA], PM3334UW [PCI]) (Gen3)
.It
Smart Cache IV (PM2?4?, PM2042 [EISA], PM2044/PM2144 [PCI]) (Gen4)
.El
.Pp
SmartRAID (PM3???) are "Enterprise" class cards,
and SmartCache (PM2???) cards are in the "Workstation" class.
The Gen 4 Smart Cache IV products were a re-issue of the Gen 3 utilizing
upgraded (and cheaper to produce) silicon.
The PM3334 (Smart RAID III) was not revamped as there was no upgraded silicon
(68040 processor) and it was using the best DPT made.
Note there has been customer confusion over the faster enterprise class card
supported by this driver being an older generation.
The Gen5 cards are supported by the
.Xr asr 4
driver.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /usr/share/man0/template.doc -compact
.It Pa sys/dev/dpt/dpt_scsi.c
Core Driver Implementation
.It Pa sys/dev/dpt/dpt.h
Register Set and Core Driver Data Structures
.It Pa sys/dev/dpt/dpt_pci.c
PCI Bus Driver Attachment
.It Pa sys/dev/dpt/dpt_eisa.c
EISA Bus Driver Attachment
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Simon Shapiro
and ported to the CAM SCSI system by
.An Justin T. Gibbs .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2.6 .
