.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2025-2026 Mateusz Piotrowski <0mp@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd May 12, 2026
.Dt DTRACE_DTMALLOC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm dtrace_dtmalloc
.Nd a DTrace provider for tracing kernel memory allocations by type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm dtmalloc Ns Cm :: Ns Ar function Ns Cm :malloc
.Nm dtmalloc Ns Cm :: Ns Ar function Ns Cm :free
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm dtmalloc
provider instruments
.Xr malloc 9
and
.Xr free 9
kernel functions to trace memory allocations by type.
Refer to
.Xr malloc 9
for more details about malloc types.
.Pp
The
.Nm dtmalloc Ns Cm :: Ns Ar function Ns Cm :malloc
probe fires upon a successful allocation.
Its probe arguments are:
.Bl -column -offset indent "malloc Probe Argument" "Definition"
.It Sy Probe Argument Ta Sy Definition
.It Fa args[0]  Ta Ft struct malloc_type *mtp
.It Fa args[1]  Ta Ft struct malloc_type_internal *mtip
.It Fa args[2]  Ta Ft struct malloc_type_stats *mtsp
.It Fa args[3]  Ta Ft unsigned long size
.It Fa args[4]  Ta Ft int zindx
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm dtmalloc Ns Cm :: Ns Ar function Ns Cm :free
probe fires upon a free operation.
Its probe arguments are:
.Bl -column -offset indent "free Probe Argument" "Definition"
.It Sy free Probe Argument Ta Sy Definition
.It Fa args[0]  Ta Ft struct malloc_type *mtp
.It Fa args[1]  Ta Ft struct malloc_type_internal *mtip
.It Fa args[2]  Ta Ft struct malloc_type_stats *mtsp
.It Fa args[3]  Ta Ft unsigned long size
.It Fa args[4]  Ta Always 0
.El
.Pp
The first three arguments for each probe
.Po i.e.,
.Fa mtp , mtip ,
and
.Fa mtsp Pc
provide references to the
.Xr malloc 9
type internals;
.Fa size
is the size of the allocation;
.Fa zindx
is the index into the
.Va kmemzones[]
array used for the allocation.
In practice,
.Fa size
is the most useful parameter to trace.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
.Ar function
part of the probe description in the
.Nm dtmalloc
provider is the
.Xr malloc 9
type short description with all whitespace characters replaced
with underscores.
For example, a malloc type defined by
.Bd -literal -offset indent
MALLOC_DEFINE(M_FOO_BAR, "foo bar", "FooBar subsystem");
.Ed
.Pp
will have probes called
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dtmalloc::foo_bar:
.Ed
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "<sys/malloc.h>"
.It In sys/malloc.h
The header where
.Vt struct malloc_type
is defined.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss Example 1 : Counting Successful Memory Allocations by Type
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
# dtrace -n 'dtmalloc:::malloc {@[stringof args[0]->ks_shortdesc] = count()}'
dtrace: description 'dtmalloc:::malloc ' matched 480 probes
^C
  80211node                                                         1
  CAM CCB                                                           1
  CAM periph                                                        1
  ioctlops                                                          1
  netlink                                                           1
  soname                                                            4
  sysctltmp                                                         4
  solaris                                                           5
  acpica                                                           16
  temp                                                             36
  lkpikmalloc                                                      44
  iov                                                             100
  selfd                                                           648
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dtrace 1 ,
.Xr tracing 7 ,
.Xr malloc 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.Nm
was written by
.An John Birrell Aq Mt jb@FreeBSD.org .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Mateusz Piotrowski Aq Mt 0mp@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm dtmalloc
provider does not trace
.Xr uma 9
allocations.
