.\" Copyright 2008-2017 Cisco Systems, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS `AS IS' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd Sept 7, 2022
.Dt ENIC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm enic
.Nd "VIC Ethernet NIC driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iflib"
.Cd "device enic"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at run-time,
run the following command as root:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kldload if_enic
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_enic_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Cisco Virtual Interface Card.
Support is limited to basic network connectivity.
Media is controlled by the NIC itself since there can be multiple
virtual PCI NIC devices exposed to the PCI bus.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver should supports all known Cisco VIC cards.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The
.Nm
network interface is configured using
.Xr ifconfig 8
and the
.Xr sysctl 8
tree at
.Dv dev.enic.<N> .
All configurable entries are also tunables, and can be put directly into the
.Xr loader.conf 5
for persistent configuration.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 14.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Cisco UCS team
based of the DPDK driver.
