.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Abdelkader Boudih <freebsd@seuros.com>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd June 19, 2026
.Dt FWCAM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fwcam
.Nd IIDC FireWire digital camera driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device firewire"
.Cd "device fwcam"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for IIDC (Instrumentation and Industrial Digital
Camera) v1.30 cameras attached via IEEE 1394 (FireWire).
.Pp
Video frames are received over an isochronous DMA channel and exposed
through a character device.
Applications read raw frames from
.Pa /dev/fwcamX
and configure the camera via
.Xr ioctl 2 .
.Pp
The driver supports Format_0 (VGA non-compressed) video with the
following modes:
.Bl -tag -width "Mode 3" -compact
.It Mode 0
160x120 YUV444 (57,600 bytes per frame)
.It Mode 1
320x240 YUV422 (153,600 bytes per frame)
.It Mode 2
640x480 YUV411 (460,800 bytes per frame)
.It Mode 3
640x480 YUV422 (614,400 bytes per frame)
.It Mode 4
640x480 RGB8 (921,600 bytes per frame)
.It Mode 5
640x480 Mono8 (307,200 bytes per frame)
.El
.Pp
Camera features
.Pq brightness, gain, shutter, focus, etc.\&
are queried and set via
.Dv FWCAM_GFEAT
and
.Dv FWCAM_SFEAT
ioctls.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports any camera compliant with the IIDC 1394-based Digital Camera
Specification v1.30.
Tested hardware:
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Apple iSight (FireWire cylinder),
EUI-64 000a270004135e5d, Format_0 modes 1\(en3
.El
.Sh IOCTLS
.Bl -tag -width "FWCAM_GINFO"
.It Dv FWCAM_GMODE Pq Vt "struct fwcam_mode"
Get the current video format, mode, and frame rate.
The
.Va frame_size
field is filled with the computed frame size in bytes.
.It Dv FWCAM_SMODE Pq Vt "struct fwcam_mode"
Set the video format, mode, and frame rate.
Streaming is restarted if active.
.It Dv FWCAM_GFEAT Pq Vt "struct fwcam_feature"
Get feature capabilities and current value.
The caller sets
.Va id
to one of the
.Dv FWCAM_FEAT_*
constants; the driver fills
.Va flags ,
.Va min ,
.Va max ,
and
.Va value .
.It Dv FWCAM_SFEAT Pq Vt "struct fwcam_feature"
Set a feature value.
.It Dv FWCAM_GINFO Pq Vt "struct fwcam_info"
Return camera capabilities, current settings, and stream statistics
including dropped frame count and active ISO channel.
.El
.Sh SYSCTLS
.Bl -tag -width "hw.firewire.fwcam.iso_channel"
.It Va hw.firewire.fwcam.iso_channel
Isochronous receive channel (default 0).
Can be set as a tunable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/fwcamX" -compact
.It Pa /dev/fwcamX
Camera character device.
Read to obtain raw video frames.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr firewire 4 ,
.Xr fwohci 4
.Pp
IIDC 1394-based Digital Camera Specification v1.30,
1394 Trade Association Document 1999023.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 16.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Abdelkader Boudih Aq Mt freebsd@seuros.com
