.\" Copyright (c) 2013, Luiz Otavio O Souza <loos@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 5, 2013
.Dt GPIOLED 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gpioled
.Nd GPIO led generic device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device gpio"
.Cd "device gpioled"
.Pp
This driver attaches a
.Xr led 4
device to a GPIO pin.
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Em gpioled
driver provides a glue to attach a
.Xr led 4
compatible device to a GPIO pin.
Each led on the system has a
.Pa name
which is used to export a device in
.Pa /dev/led/<name> .
The GPIO pin can then be controlled by writing to this device as described
on
.Xr led 4 .
.Pp
On a hint based system, like
.Li MIPS , these values are configureable for
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width ".Va hint.gpioiic.%d.atXXX"
.It Va hint.gpioled.%d.at
The gpiobus you are attaching to.
Normally assigned to gpiobus0.
.It Va hint.gpioled.%d.name
Arbitrary name of device in
.Pa /dev/led/
to create for
.Xr led 4 .
.It Va hint.gpioled.%d.pins
Which pin on the GPIO interface to map to this instance.
Please note that this mask should only ever have one bit set
(any others bits - i.e., pins - will be ignored).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gpio 4 ,
.Xr led 4 ,
.Xr gpioiic 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual page first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This
manual page was written by
.An Luiz Otavio O Souza .
