.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003
.\"	Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (FhG Fokus).
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Hartmut Brandt <harti@freebsd.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" 
.\" harp(4) man page
.\"
.Dd July 21, 2003
.Dt HARP 4
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm harp
.Nd Pseudo physical interface driver for HARP
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd options atm
.Cd options NATM
.Cd options ATM_CORE
.Cd device harp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver when loaded attaches to all netgraph ATM interface in the system and for
each of these interfaces presents a physical interface to the HARP stack.
The name of the harp physical interface is the same as the name of the
netgraph interface (they are in different namespaces).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fatm 4 ,
.Xr hatm 4 ,
.Xr patm 4 ,
.Xr ng_atm 4 ,
.Xr atm 8
.Sh CAVEATS
When
.Xr fatm 4
is used it must be started before
.Nm
is loaded to get the correct configuration for the HARP physical interface.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Harti Brandt Aq harti@freebsd.org .
