.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Vladimir Kondratyev <wulf@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 18, 2021
.Dt HCONF 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hconf
.Nd MS Windows Precision Touchpad configuration driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device hconf"
.Cd "device hid"
.Cd "device hidbus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hconf_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for generic MS Windows Precision Touchpad
configuration collection.
It enables the host to configure two different aspects of the device.
One allows the host to select input mode, and the other allows the host to be
selective in what is reported.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
Next parameters are available as
.Xr sysctl 8
variables.
Debug parameter is available as
.Xr loader 8
tunable as well.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va dev.hconf.*.input_mode
HID device input mode: 0 = mouse, 3 = touchpad.
.It Va dev.hconf.*.surface_switch
Enable / disable switch for surface: 1 = on, 0 = off.
.It Va dev.hconf.*.buttons_switch
Enable / disable switch for buttons: 1 = on, 0 = off.
.It Va hw.hid.hconf.debug
Debug output level, where 0 is debugging disabled and larger values increase
debug message verbosity.
Default is 0.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hms 4 ,
.Xr hmt 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 13.0.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Vladimir Kondratyev Aq Mt wulf@FreeBSD.org .
Switch parameter support was added by
.An Andriy Gapon Aq Mt avg@FreeBSD.org .
