.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Vladimir Kondratyev <wulf@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 14, 2020
.Dt HIDBUS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hidbus
.Nd generic HID bus driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device hidbus"
.Cd "device hid"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hidbus_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for multiple HID driver attachments to single HID
transport backend.
See
.Xr iichid 4
or
.Xr usbhid 4 .
.Pp
Each HID device can have several components, e.g., a keyboard and
a mouse.
These components use different report identifiers (a byte) combined into
groups called collections to distinguish which one data is coming from.
The
.Nm
driver has other drivers attached that handle particular
kinds of devices and
.Nm
broadcasts data to all of them.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.hid.hidbus.debug
Debug output level, where 0 is debugging disabled and larger values increase
debug message verbosity.
Default is 0.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr hconf 4 ,
.Xr hcons 4 ,
.Xr hgame 4 ,
.Xr hidraw 4 ,
.Xr hkbd 4 ,
.Xr hms 4 ,
.Xr hmt 4 ,
.Xr hpen 4 ,
.Xr hsctrl 4 ,
.Xr hskbd 4 ,
.Xr iichid 4 ,
.Xr usbhid 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 13.0.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Vladimir Kondratyev Aq Mt wulf@FreeBSD.org .
