.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 AnyWi Technologies
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 16, 2020
.Dt HIDQUIRK 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hidquirk
.Nd HID quirks module
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this module into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device hid"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the module at boot
time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hidquirk_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
module provides support for adding quirks for HID devices
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It HQ_HID_IGNORE
device should be ignored by hid class
.It HQ_KBD_BOOTPROTO
device should set the boot protocol
.It HQ_MS_BOOTPROTO
device should set the boot protocol
.It HQ_MS_BAD_CLASS
doesn't identify properly
.It HQ_MS_LEADING_BYTE
mouse sends an unknown leading byte
.It HQ_MS_REVZ
mouse has Z-axis reversed
.It HQ_SPUR_BUT_UP
spurious mouse button up events
.It HQ_MT_TIMESTAMP
Multitouch device exports HW timestamps
.Dv 0x1b5a01
.El
.Pp
See
.Pa /sys/dev/hid/hidquirk.h
for the complete list of supported quirks.
.Sh LOADER TUNABLE
The following tunable can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel, or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.hid.quirk.%d
The value is a string whose format is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.Qo BusId VendorId ProductId LowRevision HighRevision HQ_QUIRK,... Qc
.Ed
.Pp
Installs the quirks
.Ic HQ_QUIRK,...
for all HID devices matching
.Ic BusId
and
.Ic VendorId
and
.Ic ProductId
which have a hardware revision between and including
.Ic LowRevision
and
.Ic HighRevision .
.Pp
.Ic BusId ,
.Ic VendorId ,
.Ic ProductId ,
.Ic LowRevision
and
.Ic HighRevision
are all 16 bits numbers which can be decimal or hexadecimal based.
.Pp
A maximum of 100 variables
.Ic hw.hid.quirk.0, .1, ..., .99
can be defined.
.Pp
If a matching entry is found in the kernel's internal quirks table, it
is replaced by the new definition.
.Pp
Else a new entry is created given that the quirk table is not full.
.Pp
The kernel iterates over the
.Ic hw.hid.quirk.N
variables starting at
.Ic N = 0
and stops at
.Ic N = 99
or the first non-existing one.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To install a quirk at boot time, place one or several lines like the
following in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.hid.quirk.0="0x18 0x6cb 0x1941 0 0xffff HQ_MT_TIMESTAMP"
.Ed
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module appeared in
.Fx 13.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Hans Petter Selasky Aq Mt hselasky@FreeBSD.org
for
.Xr usb 4
subsystem and adopted to
.Xr hid 4
by
.An Vladimir Kondratyev Aq Mt wulf@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page is based on
.Xr usb_quirk 4
manual page written by
.An Nick Hibma Aq Mt n_hibma@FreeBSD.org .
