.\" $NetBSD: uhid.4,v 1.13 2001/12/29 14:41:59 augustss Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1999, 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 1, 2018
.Dt HIDRAW 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hidraw
.Nd Raw Access to HID devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device hidraw"
.Cd "device hid"
.Cd "device hidbus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hidraw_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides a raw interface to Human Interface Devices (HIDs).
The reports are sent to and received from the device unmodified.
.Pp
The device handles 2 sets of
.Xr ioctl 2
calls:
.Pp
.Fx
.Xr uhid 4
\-compatible calls:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv HID_GET_REPORT_ID Pq Vt int
Get the report identifier used by this HID report.
.It Dv HID_GET_REPORT_DESC Pq Vt "struct hidraw_gen_descriptor"
Get the HID report descriptor.
Copies a maximum of
.Va hgd_maxlen
bytes of the report descriptor data into the memory
specified by
.Va hgd_data .
Upon return
.Va hgd_actlen
is set to the number of bytes copied.
Using
this descriptor the exact layout and meaning of data to/from
the device can be found.
The report descriptor is delivered
without any processing.
.Bd -literal
struct hidraw_gen_descriptor {
	void   *hgd_data;
	uint16_t hgd_maxlen;
	uint16_t hgd_actlen;
	uint8_t	hgd_report_type;
	...
};
.Ed
.It Dv HID_SET_IMMED Pq Vt int
Sets the device in a mode where each
.Xr read 2
will return the current value of the input report.
Normally
a
.Xr read 2
will only return the data that the device reports on its
interrupt pipe.
This call may fail if the device does not support
this feature.
.It Dv HID_GET_REPORT Pq Vt "struct hidraw_gen_descriptor"
Get a report from the device without waiting for data on
the interrupt pipe.
Copies a maximum of
.Va hgd_maxlen
bytes of the report data into the memory specified by
.Va hgd_data .
Upon return
.Va hgd_actlen
is set to the number of bytes copied.
The
.Va hgd_report_type
field indicates which report is requested.
It should be
.Dv HID_INPUT_REPORT ,
.Dv HID_OUTPUT_REPORT ,
or
.Dv HID_FEATURE_REPORT .
On a device which uses numbered reports, the first byte of the returned data
is the report number.
The report data begins from the second byte.
For devices which do not use numbered reports, the report data begins at the
first byte.
This call may fail if the device does not support this feature.
.It Dv HID_SET_REPORT Pq Vt "struct hidraw_gen_descriptor"
Set a report in the device.
The
.Va hgd_report_type
field indicates which report is to be set.
It should be
.Dv HID_INPUT_REPORT ,
.Dv HID_OUTPUT_REPORT ,
or
.Dv HID_FEATURE_REPORT .
The value of the report is specified by the
.Va hgd_data
and the
.Va hgd_maxlen
fields.
On a device which uses numbered reports, the first byte of data to be sent is
the report number.
The report data begins from the second byte.
For devices which do not use numbered reports, the report data begins at the
first byte.
This call may fail if the device does not support this feature.
.El
.Pp
Linux
.Nm
\-compatible calls:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv HIDIOCGRDESCSIZE Pq Vt int
Get the HID report descriptor size.
Returns the size of the device report descriptor to use with
.Dv HIDIOCGRDESC
.Xr ioctl 2 .
.It Dv HIDIOCGRDESC Pq Vt "struct hidraw_report_descriptor"
Get the HID report descriptor.
Copies a maximum of
.Va size
bytes of the report descriptor data into the memory
specified by
.Va value .
.Bd -literal
struct hidraw_report_descriptor {
	uint32_t	size;
	uint8_t		value[HID_MAX_DESCRIPTOR_SIZE];
};
.Ed
.It Dv HIDIOCGRAWINFO Pq Vt "struct hidraw_devinfo"
Get structure containing the bus type, the vendor ID (VID), and product ID
(PID) of the device.
The bus type can be one of:
.Dv BUS_USB
or
.Dv BUS_I2C
which are defined in dev/evdev/input.h.
.Bd -literal
struct hidraw_devinfo {
	uint32_t	bustype;
	int16_t		vendor;
	int16_t		product;
};
.Ed
.It Dv HIDIOCGRAWNAME(len) Pq Vt "char[] buf"
Get device description.
Copies a maximum of
.Va len
bytes of the device description previously set with
.Xr device_set_desc 9
procedure into the memory
specified by
.Va buf .
.It Dv HIDIOCGRAWPHYS(len) Pq Vt "char[] buf"
Get the newbus path to the device.
.\For Bluetooth devices, it returns the hardware (MAC) address of the device.
Copies a maximum of
.Va len
bytes of the newbus device path
into the memory
specified by
.Va buf .
.It Dv HIDIOCGFEATURE(len) Pq Vt "void[] buf"
Get a feature report from the device.
Copies a maximum of
.Va len
bytes of the feature report data into the memory specified by
.Va buf .
The first byte of the supplied buffer should be set to the report
number of the requested report.
For devices which do not use numbered reports, set the first byte to 0.
The report will be returned starting at the first byte of the buffer
(ie: the report number is not returned).
This call may fail if the device does not support this feature.
.It Dv HIDIOCSFEATURE(len) Pq Vt "void[] buf"
Set a feature Report in the device.
The value of the report is specified by the
.Va buf
and the
.Va len
parameters.
Set the first byte of the supplied buffer to the report number.
For devices which do not use numbered reports, set the first byte to 0.
The report data begins in the second byte.
Make sure to set len accordingly, to one more than the length of the report
(to account for the report number).
This call may fail if the device does not support this feature.
.El
.Pp
Use
.Xr read 2
to get data from the device.
Data should be read in chunks of the
size prescribed by the report descriptor.
On a device which uses numbered reports, the first byte of the returned data
is the report number.
The report data begins from the second byte.
For devices which do not use numbered reports, the report data begins at the
first byte.
.Pp
Use
.Xr write 2
to send data to the device.
Data should be written in chunks of the
size prescribed by the report descriptor.
The first byte of the buffer passed to
.Xr write 2
should be set to the report number.
If the device does not use numbered reports, there are 2 operation modes:
.Nm
mode and
.Xr uhid 4
mode.
In the
.Nm
mode, the first byte should be set to 0 and the report data itself should
begin at the second byte.
In the
.Xr uhid 4
mode, the report data should begin at the first byte.
The modes can be switched with issuing one of
.Dv HIDIOCGRDESC
or
.Dv HID_GET_REPORT_DESC
.Xr ioctl 2
accordingly.
Default mode is
.Nm .
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The following variables are available as both
.Xr sysctl 8
variables and
.Xr loader 8
tunables:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.hid.hidraw.debug
Debug output level, where 0 is debugging disabled and larger values increase
debug message verbosity.
Default is 0.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/hidraw?"
.It Pa /dev/hidraw?
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr usbhidctl 1 ,
.Xr hid 4 ,
.Xr hidbus 4 ,
.Xr uhid 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Xr uhid 4
driver
appeared in
.Nx 1.4 .
.Nm
protocol support was added in
.Fx 13
by
.An Vladimir Kondratyev Aq Mt wulf@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was adopted from
.Nx
by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq Mt trhodes@FreeBSD.org
in April 2002.
