.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" Written by Tom Rhodes
.\" This file is public domain
.\"
.Dd January 05, 2003
.Dt IDA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ida
.Nd Compaq Intelligent Drive Array Controllers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For one or more devices:
.Cd device scbus
.Cd device ida
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
The Compaq Intelligent Drive Array (IDA) technology is used to
distribute data across an array of hard drives.
It unites these hard drives into one or more high-performance logical drives.
The drive array is managed by an array controller.
.Pp
These controllers have the ability to provide fault tolerance for the connected
drives and optionally provide write cache for the logical drives.
It is also possible for an application to access the SCSI bus subsystem directly by
using the pass-through interface.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
Extreme caution should be exercised when using the pass-through interface.
It is possible to interfere with normal system I/O and cause hangs if
pass-through is used to an active device.
Pass-through should only be used to a device that is otherwise quiescent.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
.Pp
The following controllers are supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Bl -tag -compact -width "Supported Devices"
.It Compaq SMART Array 221
.It Compaq Integrated SMART Array Controller
.It Compaq SMART Array 4200
.It Compaq SMART Array 4250ES
.It Compaq SMART 3200 Controller
.It Compaq SMART 3100ES Controller
.It Compaq SMART-2/DH Controller
.It Compaq SMART-2/SL Controller
.It Compaq SMART-2/P Controller
.It Compaq SMART-2/E Controller
.It Compaq SMART Controller
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr pass 4 ,
.Xr xpt 4 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jonathan Lemon Aq jlemon@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Matthew N. Dodd Aq mdodd@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
