.\" Copyright (c) 2001
.\"	The Aerospace Corporation.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AEROSPACE CORPORATION BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 23, 2001
.Dt IEEE80211 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ieee80211
.Nd standard interface to IEEE 802.11 devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In net/if_ieee80211.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This section describes the interface standard interface to configuration
and status information on IEEE 802.11 devices.
Most devices support options not configurable by this interface.
They must be set by their respective, specific control program.
The interface is via one
of the following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls on a socket:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv SIOCG80211"
.It Dv SIOCG80211
Get configuration or status information.
.It Dv SIOCS80211
Set configuration information.
.El
.Pp
These requests are made via a modified
.Vt ifreq
structure.
This structure is defined as follows:
.Bd -literal
struct ieee80211req {
	char		i_name[IFNAMSIZ];	/* if_name, e.g. "wi0" */
	u_int16_t	i_type;			/* req type */
	int16_t		i_val;			/* Index or simple value */
	int16_t		i_len;			/* Index or simple value */
	void		*i_data;		/* Extra data */
};
.Ed
.Pp
For
.Dv SIOCG80211
the following values of
.Va i_type
are valid:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVESLEEP"
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SSID
Returns the requested SSID by copying it into the buffer pointed to by
.Va i_data
and setting
.Va i_len
to the length.
If
.Va i_val
is \(>= 0 then the request refers to the configured value for that slot.
Generally, 0 is the only valid value, but some interfaces support more
SSIDs.
If
.Va i_val
is \-1 then the request refers to the currently active value.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_NUMSSIDS
Returns the number of SSIDs this card supports.
In most cases, this is
1, but some devices such as
.Xr an 4
support more.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEP
Returns the current WEP status in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are
.Dv IEEE80211_WEP_NOSUP , IEEE80211_WEP_ON , IEEE80211_WEP_OFF ,
and
.Dv IEEE80211_WEP_MIXED .
Respectively, these values mean unsupported, mandatory for all devices,
off, and on, but not required for all devices.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPKEY
Returns the requested WEP key via
.Va i_data
and its length via
.Va i_len .
If the device does not support returning the WEP key or the user is not
root then the key may be returned as all zeros.
Technically this is a
valid key, but it's the kind of key an idiot would put on his luggage so
we use it as a special value.
Generally, only four WEP keys are allowed, but some devices support more.
If so, the first four (0-3) are
the standard keys stored in volatile storage and the others are device
specific.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_NUMWEPKEYS
Returns the number of WEP keys supported by this device, generally 4.
A device that does not support WEP may either report 0 or simply return
.Er EINVAL .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPTXKEY
Returns the WEP key used for transmission.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AUTHMODE
Returns the current authentication mode in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are
.Dv IEEE80211_AUTH_NONE , IEEE80211_AUTH_OPEN ,
and
.Dv IEEE80211_AUTH_SHARED .
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STATIONNAME
Returns the station name via
.Va i_data
and its length via
.Va i_len .
While all known devices seem to support this in some way or another,
they all do it differently and it appears to not have anything to do
with the actual IEEE 802.11 standard so making up an answer may be
necessary for future devices.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CHANNEL
Returns the current direct sequence spread spectrum channel in use.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVE
Returns the current powersaving mode.
Valid values are
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_NOSUP , IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_OFF ,
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_ON , IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_CAM ,
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_PSP ,
and
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_PSP_CAM .
Currently,
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_ON
is defined to be equal to
.Dv IEEE80211_POWERSAVE_CAM ,
but this may be incorrect.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVESLEEP
Returns the powersave sleep time in msec in
.Va i_val .
.El
.Pp
For
.Dv SIOCS80211
the following values of
.Va i_type
are valid:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVESLEEP"
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_SSID
Set the desired SSID for infrastructure and ad-hoc modes to value given
by
.Va i_data
and
.Va i_len .
The length should be no longer then 32 characters.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEP
Set the current WEP mode to the value given in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are the same as those for this value above.
Devices which
do not support all modes may choose to either return
.Er EINVAL
or choose a reasonable alternate (supported) setting.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPKEY
Set the WEP key indicated by
.Va i_val
to the value given by
.Va i_data
and
.Va i_len .
Generally, valid values of
.Va i_len
are 0, 5, and 13 though not all devices with WEP support have support
for 13-byte keys.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_WEPTXKEY
Set the WEP key used for transmission to the value in
.Va i_val .
Not all values which are valid for setting keys may be valid for setting
transmit keys due to strange device interfaces.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_AUTHMODE
Set the current authorization mode to the value given in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are given above.
Not all devices support this.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STATIONNAME
Set the station name to the value given by
.Va i_data
and
.Va i_len .
The standard does not appear to deal with this feature so the range of
valid values may vary from device to device.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_CHANNEL
Set the desired ad-hoc channel to the value given by
.Va i_val .
On some devices this has an impact on infrastructure mode as well.
Valid values are 1-14, but 0 should be allowed and should return the
device to the default value.
May devices support this directly by
converting any invalid value to the default value.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVE
Set the current powersaving mode to the value given in
.Va i_val .
Valid values are the same as those for this value above.
Devices which
do not support all modes may choose to either return
.Er EINVAL
or choose a reasonable alternate (supported) setting.
Most devices only
support CAM mode.
.It Dv IEEE80211_IOC_POWERSAVESLEEP
Set the powersave sleep time in msec to the value in
.Va i_val .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr an 4 ,
.Xr ray 4 ,
.Xr wi 4 ,
.Xr ancontrol 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr raycontrol 8 ,
.Xr wicontrol 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
manual appeared in
.Fx 4.3 .
