.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Michael Gmelin <freebsd@grem.de>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 30, 2015
.Dt IG4 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ig4
.Nd Intel(R) fourth generation mobile CPU integrated I2C SMBus driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines into
the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ig4"
.Cd "device smbus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ig4_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides access to peripherals attached to an I2C SMB controller.
.Nm
supports the SMBus controller found in fourth generation Intel(R) Core(TM)
processors based on the mobile U-processor line for intelligent systems.
This includes the i7-4650U, i5-4300U, i3-4010U, and 2980U.
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
These
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available:
.Bl -tag -width "debug.ig4_dump"
.It Va debug.ig4_dump
Setting this to a non-zero value dumps controller registers to console and
syslog once.
The sysctl resets to zero immediately.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr smb 4 ,
.Xr smbus 4
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written for DragonFly BSD by
.An Matthew Dillon
and subsequently ported to
.Fx
by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Michael Gmelin Aq Mt freebsd@grem.de .
