.\"-
.\" Copyright 2021 Intel Corp
.\" Copyright 2021 Rubicon Communications, LLC (Netgate)
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
.\"
.Dd January 9, 2023
.Dt IGC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm igc
.Nd "Intel Ethernet Controller I225 driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iflib"
.Cd "device igc"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_igc_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for any PCI Express adapter or LOM (LAN
On Motherboard) based on the Intel I225 Multi Gigabit Controller.
The driver supports Transmit/Receive checksum offload, Jumbo Frames,
MSI/MSI-X, TSO, and RSS.
.Pp
Support for Jumbo Frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility
configures the adapter to receive and transmit Jumbo Frames.
The maximum MTU size for Jumbo Frames is 9216 bytes.
.Pp
This driver version supports VLAN hardware insertion / extraction, and
VLAN checksum offload.
For information on enabling VLANs, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm 10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enables auto-negotiation for speed and duplex.
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Sets 10Mbps operation.
Use the
.Cm mediaopt
option to select
.Cm half-duplex
mode.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Sets 100Mbps operation.
Use the
.Cm mediaopt
option to select
.Cm half-duplex
mode.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Sets 1000Mbps operation.
Only
.Cm full-duplex
mode is supported at this speed.
.It Cm 2500baseT
Sets 2500Mbps operation.
Only
.Cm full-duplex
mode is supported at this speed.
.El
.Pp
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following models:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
I225-LM
.It
I225-V
.It
I225-IT
.It
I225-K
.El
.Sh LOADER TUNABLES
Tunables can be set at the
.Xr loader 8
prompt before booting the kernel or stored in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va hw.igc.igc_disable_crc_stripping
Disable or enable hardware stripping of CRC field.
This is mostly useful on BMC/IPMI shared interfaces where stripping the
CRC causes remote access over IPMI to fail.
Default 0 (enabled).
.It Va hw.igc.rx_int_delay
This value delays the generation of receive interrupts in units
of 1.024 microseconds.
The default value is 0, since adapters may hang with this feature being
enabled.
.It Va hw.igc.rx_abs_int_delay
If hw.igc.rx_int_delay is non-zero, this tunable limits the
maximum delay in which a receive interrupt is generated.
.It Va hw.igc.tx_int_delay
This value delays the generation of transmit interrupts in units
of 1.024 microseconds.
The default value is 64.
.It Va hw.igc.tx_abs_int_delay
If hw.igc.tx_int_delay is non-zero, this tunable limits the
maximum delay in which a transmit interrupt is generated.
.It Va hw.igc.sbp
Show bad packets when in promiscuous mode.
Default is false.
.It Va hw.igc.eee_setting
Disable or enable Energy Efficient Ethernet.
Default 1 (disabled).
.It Va hw.igc.max_interrupt_rate
Maximum device interrupts per second.
The default is 8000.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "igc%d: Hardware Initialization Failed"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "igc%d: Unable to allocate bus resource: memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "igc%d: Invalid MAC address"
The MAC address programmed into the EEPROM is either empty or a multicast/broadcast
address.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr iflib 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 14.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
was originally written by
.An Intel Corporation
and converted to the
.Xr iflib 4
framework by
.An Netgate .
