.\" Copyright (c) 2014 Gavin Atkinson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\"
.\"    - Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"    - Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above
.\"      copyright notice, this list of conditions and the following
.\"      disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided
.\"      with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd January 29, 2022
.Dt IPHETH 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ipheth
.Nd "USB Apple iPhone/iPad tethered Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To load the driver as a module at boot time, place the
following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ipheth_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to compile this driver into the kernel, place the
following lines in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device uether"
.Cd "device ipheth"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for network access through Apple
iPhone and iPad devices, often referred to as USB tethering.
.Pp
.Nm
should work with any Apple iPhone or iPad device.
In most cases this must be explicitly enabled on the device first.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
The device does not support different media types or options.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following devices are supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Apple iPhone tethering (all models)
.It
Apple iPad tethering (all models)
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bl -tag -width 0n
.It Sy Example 1\&: No Manual Configuration
.Pp
The following example shows how to manually configure network access on a
device that is not automatically recognized.
.Pp
First, load the driver and find out the unit and the address of the USB
Apple
device:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
.Li # Ic kldload ipheth
.Li # Ic usbconfig | grep Apple
ugen0.2: <Apple Inc. iPhone> at usbus0, cfg=0 md=HOST spd=HIGH (480Mbps) pwr=ON (500mA)
.Ed
.Pp
In this example, the unit and the address of the device is 0.2
.Pq Dq Li ugen0.2 ,
and its configuration index is 0
.Pq Dq Li cfg=0 .
.Pp
Secondly, check what other configurations are available for the device:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
.Li # Ic usbconfig -d 0.2 dump_all_config_desc | grep -E '(^ Conf|iConf)'
 Configuration index 0
    iConfiguration = 0x0005  <PTP>
 Configuration index 1
    iConfiguration = 0x0006  <iPod USB Interface>
 Configuration index 2
    iConfiguration = 0x0007  <PTP + Apple Mobile Device>
 Configuration index 3
    iConfiguration = 0x0008  <PTP + Apple Mobile Device + Apple USB Ethernet>
.Ed
.Pp
In this example, there are 4 different configurations available.
The configuration with index 3 seems to be related to Ethernet.
It is time to configure the device:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
.Li # Ic usbconfig -d 0.2 set_config 3
.Li # Ic usbconfig | grep 'Apple.*cfg=3'
ugen0.2: <Apple Inc. iPhone> at usbus0, cfg=3 md=HOST spd=HIGH (480Mbps) pwr=ON (500mA)
.Ed
.Pp
At this point the Apple device should ask whether the
.Fx
machine can be trusted
.Po Dq Mobile Data
has to be on
.Pc .
.Pp
A new
.Em ue
USB Ethernet interface should become available:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
.Li # Ic dmesg | grep 'ue[0-9]'
ue0: <USB Ethernet> on ipheth0
ue0: bpf attached
ue0: Ethernet address: 4e:7c:5f:2c:5f:7a
.Ed
.Pp
At this point it might be necessary to run
.Xr usbmuxd 1
.Po available in
.Xr ports 7
at
.Pa comms/usbmuxd
.Pc :
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
.Li # Ic usbmuxd --enable-exit --foreground --user root --verbose
.Ed
.Pp
Now it is time to configure the network interface:
.Bd -literal -offset 2n
.Li # Ic sysrc ifconfig_ue0="SYNCDHCP"
ifconfig_ue0:  -> SYNCDHCP
.Li # Ic service netif restart ue0
.Ed
.Pp
That is it.
The machine should now be connected to the network via USB tethering.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr cdce 4 ,
.Xr cdceem 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr urndis 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr usbconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 8.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Hans Petter Selasky Aq Mt hselasky@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
Some devices are not recognized automatically and may need to be manually
configured to use an alternative configuration with the
.Xr usbconfig 8
utility.
See
.Sx EXAMPLES
for workarounds.
