.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 20, 2006
.Dt IPMI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ipmi
.Nd "OpenIPMI compatible IPMI interface driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ipmi"
.Pp
.In sys/dev/ipmi.h
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_RECEIVE_MSG_TRUNC" "struct ipmi_recv *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_RECEIVE_MSG" "struct ipmi_recv *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_SEND_COMMAND" "struct ipmi_req *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_REGISTER_FOR_CMD" "struct ipmi_cmdspec *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_UNREGISTER_FOR_CMD" "struct ipmi_cmdspec *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_SET_GETS_EVENTS_CMD" "int *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_SET_MY_ADDRESS_CMD" "unsigned int *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_GET_MY_ADDRESS_CMD" "unsigned int *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_SET_MY_LUN_CMD" "unsigned int *"
.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int d" "IPMICTL_GET_MY_LUN_CMD" "unsigned int *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Tn IPMI
(Intelligent Platform Management Interface) is a standard for
monitoring system hardware by permitting generic code to detect
and monitor the sensors in a system.
The
.Tn IPMI
standard offers watchdog support, an FRU database, and other
support extensions.
It is currently being adopted by the makers of many
single board and embedded system manufacturers.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver in
.Fx
is heavily adopted from the standard and
.Lx
driver; however, not all features described in the
standard are supported.
.Sh IOCTL
Sending and receiving messages through the
.Nm
driver requires the use of IOCTLs.
The IOCTLs are used due to the complexity of
data sent to and from the device.
Currently the following IOCTLs are defined:
.Pp
.Dv IPMI_IOC_MAGIC
The magic IOCTL value for this interface.
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_RECEIVE_MSG_TRUNC
Like
.Dv RECEIVE_MSG
but if the message can not fit into the buffer, it
will truncate the contents instead of leaving the data
in the buffer.
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_RECEIVE_MSG
Receive a message.
Possible error values:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EAGAIN
No messages are in the process queue.
.It Bq Er EFAULT
An address supplied was invalid.
.It Bq Er EMSGSIZE
The address could not fit in the message buffer and
will remain in the buffer.
.El
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_SEND_COMMAND
Send a message to the interface.
Possible error values:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
An address supplied was invalid
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Buffers could not be allowed for the command, out of memory.
.El
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_SET_MY_ADDRESS_CMD
Set the slave address for source messages.
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_GET_MY_ADDRESS_CMD
Get the slave address for source messages.
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_SET_MY_LUN_CMD
Set the slave LUN for source messages.
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_GET_MY_LUN_CMD
Get the slave LUN for source messages.
.Pp
.Ss Unimplemented IOCTLS:
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_REGISTER_FOR_CMD
Register to receive a specfic command
Possible error values:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
An supplied address was invalid.
.It Bq Er EBUSY
The network function/command is already in use.
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
Could not allocate memory.
.El
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_UNREGISTER_FOR_CMD
Unregister to receive a specific command
Possible error values:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
An address supplied was invalid.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The network function/command was not found.
.El
.Pp
.Ss Stub only IOCTL:
.Pp
.Dv IPMICTL_SET_GETS_EVENTS_CMD
Set whether this interface receives events.
Possible error values:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EFAULT
An address supplied was invalid.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr watchdog 4 ,
.Xr watchdog 8 ,
.Xr watchdogd 8 ,
.Xr watchdog 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 7.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Doug Ambrisko Aq ambrisko@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
Not all features of the MontaVista driver are supported.
.Pp
Currently, IPMB and BT modes are not implemented.
