.\" Copyright (c) 2004
.\"	Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice unmodified, this list of conditions, and the following
.\"    disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 16, 2005
.Os
.Dt IPW 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm ipw
.Nd "Intel PRO/Wireless 2100 IEEE 802.11 driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ipw"
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ipw_load="YES"
wlan_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn Intel
PRO/Wireless 2100 MiniPCI network adapter.
.Pp
By default, the
.Nm
driver configures the adapter for BSS operation (aka infrastructure mode).
This mode requires the use of an access point.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
This driver requires firmware to be loaded before it will work.
You need to obtain
.Xr ipwcontrol 8
from the IPW web page listed below to accomplish loading the firmware
before
.Xr ifconfig 8
will work.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig ipw0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig ipw0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 40-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig ipw0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
    wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 104-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig ipw0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
    wepmode on wepkey 0x01020304050607080910111213
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ipw%d: device timeout"
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "ipw%d: Please load firmware"
The required firmware has not been loaded into the card, and therefore
the card cannot operate.
Load the firmware with
.Xr ipwcontrol 8
before proceeding.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr an 4 ,
.Xr ath 4 ,
.Xr iwi 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wi 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr ipwcontrol 8 ,
.Xr wicontrol 8
.Rs
.%T The IPW Web Page
.%O http://damien.bergamini.free.fr/ipw/
.Re
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Damien Bergamini Aq damien@FreeBSD.org .
