.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"	$OpenBSD: it.4,v 1.8 2006/09/08 15:09:14 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Julien Bordet <zejames@greygats.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd 13 September 2007
.Dt IT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm it
.Nd ITE IT8705F/12F/16F and SiS SiS950 Super I/O Hardware Monitor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device isa"
.Cd "device it"
.Pp
In
.Pa /boot/device.hints :
.Cd hint.it.0.at="isa"
.Cd hint.it.0.port="0x290"
.Cd hint.it.1.at="isa"
.Cd hint.it.1.port="0xc00"
.Cd hint.it.2.at="isa"
.Cd hint.it.2.port="0xd00"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn IT8705F , IT8712F , IT8716F
and
.Tn SiS950
hardware monitors.
The values are exposed through the
.Va HW_SENSORS
.Xr sysctl 3
interface.
.Pp
Most supported devices possess 15 sensors:
.Bl -column "Sensor" "Units" "Typical" -offset indent
.It Sy "Sensor" Ta Sy "Units" Ta Sy "Typical Use"
.It Li "Fan0" Ta "RPM" Ta "CPU Fan"
.It Li "Fan1" Ta "RPM" Ta "Fan"
.It Li "Fan2" Ta "RPM" Ta "Fan"
.It Li "IN0" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Core voltage"
.It Li "IN1" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Core voltage"
.It Li "IN2" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+3.3V"
.It Li "IN3" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+5V"
.It Li "IN4" Ta "uV DC" Ta "+12V"
.It Li "IN5" Ta "uV DC" Ta "Unknown"
.It Li "IN6" Ta "uV DC" Ta "-12V"
.It Li "IN7" Ta "uV DC" Ta "-5V"
.It Li "IN8" Ta "uV DC" Ta "VBAT"
.It Li "Temp" Ta "uK" Ta "Motherboard Temperature"
.It Li "Temp" Ta "uK" Ta "Motherboard Temperature"
.It Li "Temp" Ta "uK" Ta "CPU Temperature"
.El
.Pp
For some devices, sensors' names and numbers will be different.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr systat 1 ,
.Xr sysctl 3 ,
.Xr sensorsd 8 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.4 .
.Fx
support was added in
.Fx 7.XXX .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Julien Bordet Aq zejames@greyhats.org .
It was ported to
.Fx
by
.An Constantine A. Murenin Aq cnst@FreeBSD.org
as a part of a Google Summer of Code 2007 project.
.Sh BUGS
Interrupt support is unimplemented.
