.\" Copyright (c) 2004-2006
.\"	Damien Bergamini <damien.bergamini@free.fr>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice unmodified, this list of conditions, and the following
.\"    disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 5, 2007
.Os
.Dt IWI 4
.Sh NAME
.Nm iwi
.Nd "Intel PRO/Wireless 2200BG/2225BG/2915ABG IEEE 802.11 driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iwi"
.Cd "device iwi_bss"
.Cd "device iwi_ibss"
.Cd "device iwi_monitor"
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Cd "device firmware"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_iwi_load="YES"
iwi_bss_load="YES"
iwi_ibss_load="YES"
iwi_monitor_load="YES"
wlan_load="YES"
firmware_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for
.Tn Intel
PRO/Wireless 2200BG/2915ABG MiniPCI and 2225BG PCI network adapters.
.Pp
By default, the
.Nm
driver configures the adapter for BSS operation (aka infrastructure mode).
This mode requires the use of an access point.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
This driver requires firmware to be loaded before it will work.
For the loaded firmware to work the license at
.Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/intel_iwi/LICENSE
must be agreed to and the following line be added to
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Pp
.Dl "legal.intel_iwi.license_ack=1"
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/intel_iwi/LICENSE" -compact
.It Pa /usr/share/doc/legal/intel_iwi/LICENSE
.Nm
firmware license
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
    wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 weptxkey 1
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 128-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig iwi0 inet 192.168.0.20 netmask 0xffffff00 ssid my_net \e
    wepmode on wepkey 0x01020304050607080910111213 weptxkey 1
.Ed
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "iwi%d: device timeout"
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwi%d: firmware error"
The onboard microcontroller crashes for some reason.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwi%d: timeout waiting for firmware initialization to complete"
The onboard microcontroller failed to initialize in time.
This should not happen.
.It "iwi%d: could not load firmware image '%s'"
The driver failed to load the firmware image using the
.Xr firmware 9
subsystem.
Verify that the necessary firmware modules are loaded and the
license agreement
.Xr loader 8
tunable has been set.
.It "iwi%d: could not load boot firmware"
An attempt to upload the boot firmware image to the onboard microcontroller
failed.
This should not happen.
.It "iwi%d: could not load microcode"
An attempt to upload the microcode image to the onboard microcontroller failed.
This should not happen.
.It "iwi%d: could not load main firmware"
An attempt to upload the main firmware image to the onboard microcontroller
failed.
This should not happen.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr altq 4 ,
.Xr ipw 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Damien Bergamini Aq damien@FreeBSD.org .
