.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: ISC
.\"
.\" $OpenBSD: iwx.4,v 1.21 2025/03/27 15:12:14 jmc Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Stefan Sperling <stsp@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.Dd November 14, 2025
.Dt IWX 4 amd64
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm iwx
.Nd Intel WiFi 6 IEEE 802.11ax wireless network driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
include the following lines in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device iwx"
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_iwx_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the Intel Wi-Fi 6 series of M.2
wireless network adapters.
If the appropriate hardware is detected, and
.Xr iwlwifi 4
is blacklisted in
.Xr rc.conf 5 ,
the driver will be automatically loaded with
.Xr devmatch 8 .
The
.Nm
driver can be configured at runtime with
.Xr ifconfig 8
or at boot with
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.Pp
These are the modes the
.Nm
driver can operate in:
.Bl -tag -width "monitor mode"
.It station mode
This is used when associating with an access point,
through which all traffic passes.
Background scanning is supported in this mode, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
Station mode is the default.
.It monitor mode
In this mode the driver is able to receive packets without
associating with an access point.
This disables the internal receive filter and enables the card to
capture packets from networks which it wouldn't normally have access to,
or to scan for access points.
.El
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following M.2 wireless network adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
Intel Wi-Fi 6 AX200
.It
Intel Wi-Fi 6 AX201 CNVi
.It
Intel Wi-Fi 6 AX210
.It
Intel Wi-Fi 6 AX211 CNVi
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
The
.Nm
driver supports the following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables:
.Bl -tag -width "hw.usb.mtw.debug"
.It Va dev.iwx.?.debug
Specify debug level as a bitmask.
Default
.Ql 0 .
.El
.Sh FILES
The
.Nm
driver requires firmware from
.Pa ports/net/wifi-firmware-iwlwifi-kmod .
This firmware package will be installed automatically with
.Xr fwget 8
if the appropriate hardware is detected at installation or runtime.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "iwx0: device timeout"
A frame dispatched to the hardware for transmission did not complete
in time.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwx0: fatal firmware error"
For some reason, the firmware crashed.
The driver will reset the hardware.
This should not happen.
.It "iwx0: radio is disabled by hardware switch"
The radio transmitter is off and thus no packet can go out.
The driver will reset the hardware.
Make sure the laptop radio switch is on.
.It "iwx0: could not read firmware ... (error N)"
For some reason, the driver was unable to read the firmware image from
the filesystem.
The file might be missing or corrupted.
.It "iwx0: firmware too short: N bytes"
The firmware image is corrupted and can't be loaded into the adapter.
.It "iwx0: could not load firmware"
An attempt to load the firmware into the adapter failed.
The driver will reset the hardware.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr iwlwifi 4 ,
.Xr iwlwififw 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr networking 7 ,
.Xr fwget 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver does not support hardware encryption offload.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver does not support 802.11ax.
Additional work is required in
.Xr ieee80211 9
before those features can be supported.
