.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Networks Associates Technology, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed for the FreeBSD Project by Chris Costello
.\" at Safeport Network Services and Network Associates Labs, the
.\" Security Research Division of Network Associates, Inc. under
.\" DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035 ("CBOSS"), as part of the
.\" DARPA CHATS research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 11, 2003
.Dt MAC_PORTACL 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mac_portacl
.Nd network port access control policy
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile the port access control policy into your kernel,
place the following lines in your kernel
configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options MAC"
.Cd "options MAC_PORTACL"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternately, to load the port access control policy module at boot time,
place the following line in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options MAC"
.Ed
.Pp
and in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Pp
.Dl "mac_portacl_load=""YES"""
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
policy allows administrators to administratively limit binding to
local
.Tn UDP
and
.Tn TCP
ports via the
.Xr sysctl 8
interface.
.Pp
In order to enable the
.Nm
policy, MAC policy must be enforced on sockets
(see
.Xr mac 4 ) ,
and the port(s) protected by
.Nm
must not be included in the range specified by
the
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.reservedlow
and
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.reservedhigh
.Xr sysctl 8
MIBs.
.Ss Runtime Configuration
The port access control list is specified in the
.Va security.mac.portacl.rules
.Xr sysctl 8
MIB in the following format:
.Pp
.Sm off
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.Ar idtype
.Li :
.Ar id
.Li :
.Ar protocol
.Li :
.Ar port
.Oo
.Li ,
.Ar idtype
.Li :
.Ar id
.Li :
.Ar protocol
.Li :
.Ar port
.Li ,
.Ar ...
.Oc
.Ed
.Sm on
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Ar protocol"
.It Ar idtype
Describes the type of subject match to be performed.
Either
.Li uid
for user ID matching, or
.Li gid
for group ID matching.
.It Ar id
The user or group ID (depending on
.Ar idtype )
allowed to bind to the specified port.
.Bf -emphasis
NOTE: User and group names are not valid; only the actual ID numbers
may be used.
.Ef
.It Ar protocol
Describes which protocol this entry applies to.
Either
.Li tcp
or
.Li udp
are supported.
.It Ar port
Describes which port this entry applies to.
.Bf -emphasis
NOTE: MAC security policies may not override other security system policies
by allowing accesses that they may deny, such as
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.reservedlow /
.Va net.inet.ip.portrange.reservedhigh .
.Ef
If the specified port falls within the range specified, the
.Nm
entry will not function
(i.e., even the specified user/group may not be able to bind to the specified
port).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr mac 3 ,
.Xr mac_biba 4 ,
.Xr mac_bsdextended 4 ,
.Xr mac_ifoff 4 ,
.Xr mac_mls 4 ,
.Xr mac_none 4 ,
.Xr mac_partition 4 ,
.Xr mac_seeotheruids 4 ,
.Xr mac_test 4 ,
.Xr mac 9
.Sh HISTORY
MAC first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This software was contributed to the
.Fx
Project by NAI Labs, the Security Research Division of Network Associates
Inc. under DARPA/SPAWAR contract N66001-01-C-8035
.Pq Dq CBOSS ,
as part of the DARPA CHATS research program.
