.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Florian Walpen <dev@submerge.ch>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 7, 2021
.Dt MAC_PRIORITY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mac_priority
.Nd "policy for scheduling privileges of non-root users"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile the mac_priority policy into your kernel, place the following lines
in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options MAC"
.Cd "options MAC_PRIORITY"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternately, to load the mac_priority policy module at boot time,
place the following line in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options MAC"
.Ed
.Pp
and in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mac_priority_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
policy grants scheduling privileges based on
.Xr group 5
membership.
Users or processes in the group
.Sq realtime
(gid 47) are allowed to run threads and processes with realtime scheduling
priority.
Users or processes in the group
.Sq idletime
(gid 48) are allowed to run threads and processes with idle scheduling
priority.
.Pp
With the
.Nm
realtime policy active, privileged users may use the
.Xr rtprio 1
utility to start processes with realtime priority.
Privileged applications can promote threads and processes to realtime
priority through the
.Xr rtprio 2
system calls.
.Pp
When the idletime policy is active, privileged users may use the
.Xr idprio 1
utility to start processes with idle priority.
Privileged applications can demote threads and processes to idle
priority through the
.Xr rtprio 2
system calls.
.Ss Privileges Granted
The kernel privileges granted to any process running
with the corresponding group gid is:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv PRIV_SCHED_RTPRIO" -offset indent
.It Dv PRIV_SCHED_RTPRIO
If it is a member of the realtime group.
.It Dv PRIV_SCHED_IDPRIO
If it is a member of the idletime group.
.El
.Ss Runtime Configuration
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
MIBs are available for fine-tuning this MAC policy.
All
.Xr sysctl 8
variables can also be set as
.Xr loader 8
tunables in
.Xr loader.conf 5 .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va security.mac.priority.realtime
Enable the realtime policy.
(Default: 1).
.It Va security.mac.priority.realtime_gid
The numeric gid of the realtime group.
(Default: 47).
.It Va security.mac.priority.idletime
Enable the idletime policy.
(Default: 1).
.It Va security.mac.priority.idletime_gid
The numeric gid of the idletime group.
(Default: 48).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr idprio 1 ,
.Xr rtprio 1 ,
.Xr rtprio 2 ,
.Xr mac 4
.Sh HISTORY
MAC first appeared in
.Fx 5.0
and
.Nm
first appeared in
.Fx 14.0 .
