.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 Weongyo Jeong <weongyo@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\""
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce at minimum a disclaimer
.\"    similar to the "NO WARRANTY" disclaimer below ("Disclaimer") and any
.\"    redistribution must be conditioned upon including a substantially
.\"    similar Disclaimer requirement for further binary redistribution.
.\" 3. Neither the names of the above-listed copyright holders nor the names
.\"    of any contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" NO WARRANTY
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF NONINFRINGEMENT, MERCHANTIBILITY
.\" AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL
.\" THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
.\" IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"/
.Dd October 21, 2009
.Dt MALO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm malo
.Nd "Marvell Libertas IEEE 802.11b/g wireless network driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device malo"
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device wlan"
.Cd "device firmware"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_malo_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Marvell Libertas 88W8335 based PCI
and Cardbus network adapters.
.Nm
supports
.Cm station
and
.Cm monitor
mode operation.
Only one virtual interface may be configured at any time.
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Pp
This driver requires the
.Nm malofw
firmware kernel module be installed before it will work.
The firmware files are not publicly available.
A port of the firmware can be found at:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
http://weongyo.org/project/malo/malo-firmware-1.4.tar.gz
.Ed
.Pp
The firmware kernel module can be installed by extracting
the archive and running
.Ql make install clean
in the
.Pa malo-firmware-1.4
directory.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following cards are among those supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -column -compact "Microcom Travelcard" "MALO111" "CardBus" "a/b/g" -offset 6n
.Em "Card	Chip	Bus	Standard"
Netgear WG311v3	88W8335	PCI	b/g
Tenda TWL542P	88W8335	PCI	b/g
U-Khan UW-2054i	88W8335	PCI	b/g
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Join an existing BSS network (i.e., connect to an access point):
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev malo0 inet 192.168.0.20 \e
    netmask 0xffffff00
.Ed
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with network name
.Dq Li my_net :
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wlan create wlandev malo0 ssid my_net up"
.Pp
Join a specific BSS network with 64-bit WEP encryption:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ifconfig wlan create wlandev malo0 ssid my_net \e
	wepmode on wepkey 0x1234567890 weptxkey 1 up
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cardbus 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr wlan 4 ,
.Xr wlan_ccmp 4 ,
.Xr wlan_tkip 4 ,
.Xr wlan_wep 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wpa_supplicant 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 7.1 .
