.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Scott Long
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 1, 2006
.Dt MFI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mfi
.Nd "LSI MegaRAID SAS driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device mfi"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mfi_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver is for LSI's next generation PCI Express SAS RAID controllers.
Access to RAID arrays (logical disks) from this driver is provided via
.Pa /dev/mfid?
device nodes.
A simple management interface is also provided on a per-controller basis via
the
.Pa /dev/mfi?
device node.
.Pp
The
.Nm
name is derived from the phrase "MegaRAID Firmware Interface", which is
substantially different than the old "MegaRAID" interface and thus requires
a new driver.
Older SCSI and SATA MegaRAID cards are supported by
.Xr amr 4
and will not work with this driver.
.Pp
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following hardware:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 8408E
.It
LSI MegaRAID SAS 8480E
.It
Dell PERC5/i
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/mfid?" -compact
.It Pa /dev/mfid?
array/logical disk interface
.It Pa /dev/mfi?
management interface
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr amr 4 ,
.Xr pci 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 7.0 .
.Pp
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Scott Long Aq scottl@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The driver does not support big-endian architectures at this time.
