.\" Written by Tom Rhodes for the FreeBSD Project.
.\" Please see the /usr/src/COPYRIGHT file for copyright information.
.\"
.\" This document takes information from the IEEE 802.3 Standard
.\" along with various comments from Peter Wemm, Robert Watson, and Bill Paul.
.\" Originally this file looked much like the NetBSD mii(4) manual page, but
.\" I doubt you would ever notice due to large differences.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 15, 2003
.Dt MIIBUS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm miibus
.Nd IEEE 802.3 Media Independent Interface network bus
.Sh SYNOPSIS
For most network interface cards (NIC):
.Cd "device miibus"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides an interconnection between the Media Access Control (MAC)
sublayer, the Physical Layer entities (PHY), Station Management (STA)
entities, and the PHY Layer as defined by the IEEE 802.3 Standard.
.Pp
The
.Nm
layer allows network device drivers to share common support
code for various external PHY devices.
Most 10/100 network interface cards either use an MII transceiver
or have built-in transceivers that can be programmed using an MII
interface.
The
.Nm
driver currently handles all of the media detection,
selection, and reporting using the ifmedia interface.
A generic driver has been included for all PHYs that are not
handled by a specific driver, this is possible because all
10/100 PHYs implement the same general register set along with
their vendor specific register set.
.Pp
The following network device drivers use the
.Nm
interface:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact -width ".Xr fxp 4"
.It Xr an 4
Aironet 4500/4800 802.11 wireless NICs
.It Xr aue 4
ADMtek USB Ethernet
.It Xr awi 4
BayStack 660 and others
.It Xr bge 4
Broadcom BCM570xx Gigabit Ethernet
.It Xr cue 4
CATC USB Ethernet
.It Xr dc 4
DEC/Intel 21143 and various workalikes
.It Xr ed 4
NE[12]000, SMC Ultra, 3c503, DS8390 cards
.It Xr fxp 4
Intel EtherExpress PRO/100B (82557, 82558)
.It Xr gem 4
Sun ERI, Sun GEM and Apple GMAC Ethernet
.It Xr hme 4
Sun HME Ethernet
.It Xr kue 4
Kawasaki LSI USB Ethernet
.It Xr pcn 4
AMD Am79C97x PCI 10/100
.It Xr rl 4
RealTek 8129/8139
.It Xr sf 4
Adaptec AIC-6915
.It Xr sis 4
Silicon Integrated Systems SiS 900/SiS 7016
.It Xr ste 4
Sundance ST201 (D-Link DFE-550TX)
.It Xr tl 4
Texas Instruments ThunderLAN
.It Xr tx 4
SMC EtherPower II (83c170)
.It Xr vr 4
VIA Rhine, Rhine II
.It Xr wb 4
Winbond W89C840F
.It Xr xl 4
3Com 3c90x
.El
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
The implementation of
.Nm
was originally intended to have similar API interfaces
to
.Bsx 3.0
and
.Nx ,
but as a result are not well behaved newbus device drivers.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr an 4 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr aue 4 ,
.Xr awi 4 ,
.Xr bge 4 ,
.Xr cue 4 ,
.Xr dc 4 ,
.Xr ed 4 ,
.Xr fxp 4 ,
.Xr gem 4 ,
.Xr hme 4 ,
.Xr kue 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pcn 4 ,
.Xr rl 4 ,
.Xr sf 4 ,
.Xr sis 4 ,
.Xr ste 4 ,
.Xr tl 4 ,
.Xr tx 4 ,
.Xr vr 4 ,
.Xr wb 4 ,
.Xr xl 4
.Sh STANDARDS
More information on MII can be found in the IEEE 802.3 Standard.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
