.\" Copyright (c) 2015 Mellanox Technologies
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 NVIDIA corporation & affiliates
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS `AS IS' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 20, 2021
.Dt MLX5EN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mlx5en
.Nd "NVIDIA Mellanox ConnectX-4/5/6 [Dx/Ex/Lx] based 200Gb, 100Gb, 50Gb, 40Gb, 25Gb and 10Gb ethernet adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options COMPAT_LINUXKPI"
.Cd "options RATELIMIT"
.Cd "options KERN_TLS"
.Cd "device xz"
.Cd "device mlxfw"
.Cd "device firmware"
.Cd "device mlx5"
.Cd "device mlx5en"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at run-time,
run the following command as root:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kldload mlx5en
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mlx5en_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Express Ethernet adapters based on
ConnectX-4/5/6 [Dx, Ex and Lx variants].
The driver supports Jumbo Frames, Transmit and Receive checksum offload,
TCP segmentation offload (TSO), Large Receive Offload (LRO),
HW Large Receive Offload (HW LRO), VLAN tag insertion and extraction,
VLAN checksum offload, VLAN TSO, hardware rate limiting (TXRTLMT),
stateless VxLAN hardware offload for receive and transmit,
HW TLS offload for transmit, Receive Side Steering (RSS) and
.Xr NUMA 4
awareness.
.Pp
The network interface name is
.Dv mce<N>
which corresponds to a PCI function,
.Dv mlx_core<N> ,
where
.Dv <N>
is a number starting at zero.
There is at most one network interface per PCI function.
.Pp
For further information and questions related to hardware
requirements, see
.Pa https://www.mellanox.com .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports 200Gb, 100Gb, 50Gb, 40Gb, 25Gb and 10Gb ethernet adapters.
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
ConnectX-6 supports 10/20/25/40/50/56/100Gb/200Gb/s speeds.
.It
ConnectX-5 supports 10/20/25/40/50/56/100Gb/s speeds.
.It
ConnectX-4 supports 10/20/25/40/50/56/100Gb/s speeds.
.It
ConnectX-4 LX supports 10/25/40/50Gb/s speeds and reduced power consumption.
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The
.Nm
network interface is configured using
.Xr ifconfig 8
and the
.Xr sysctl 8
tree at
.Dv dev.mce.<N> .
All configurable entries are also tunables, and can be put directly into the
.Xr loader.conf 5
for persistent configuration.
.Sh SUPPORT
For general information and support,
go to the NVIDIA Mellanox networking support website at:
.Pa https://www.mellanox.com .
.Pp
If an issue is identified with this driver using a supported adapter,
e-mail all the specific information related to the issue to
.Aq Mt nbu-freebsd-drivers@nvidia.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 11.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An NVIDIA Mellanox networking <nbu-freebsd-drivers@nvidia.com> .
