.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2018, 2019 Mellanox Technologies
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 2, 2019
.Dt mlx5io 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mlx5io
.Nd IOCTL interface to manage Connect-X 4/5/6 Mellanox network adapters
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In dev/mlx5/mlx5io.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface is provided for management of the Connect-X4, 5 and 6 network adapters
in the aspects not covered by the generic network configuration,
mostly related to the PCIe attachment and internal card working.
Interface consists of the commands, which are passed by means of
.Xr ioctl 2
on the file descriptor, opened from the
.Pa /dev/mlx5ctl
device node.
.Pp
The following commands are implemented:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv MLX5_FWDUMP_FORCE
Take the snapshot of the firmware registers state and store it in the
kernel buffer.
The buffer must be empty, in other words, no dumps should be written so
far, or existing dump cleared with the
.Dv MLX5_FWDUMP_RESET
command for the specified device.
The argument for the command should point to the
.Vt struct mlx5_tool_addr
structure, containing the PCIe bus address of the device.
.Bd -literal
struct mlx5_tool_addr {
	uint32_t domain;
	uint8_t bus;
	uint8_t slot;
	uint8_t func;
};
.Ed
.It Dv MLX5_FWDUMP_RESET
Clear the stored firmware dump, preparing the kernel buffer for
the next dump.
The argument for the command should point to the
.Vt struct mlx5_tool_addr
structure, containing the PCIe bus address of the device.
.It Dv MLX5_FWDUMP_GET
Fetch the stored firmware dump into the user memory.
The argument to the command should point to the input/output
.Vt struct mlx5_fwdump_get
structure.
Its
.Dv devaddr
field specifies the address of the device, the
.Dv buf
fields points to the array of
.Vt struct mlx5_fwdump_reg
of records of the registers values, the size of the array is specified
in the
.Dv reg_cnt
field.
.Bd -literal
struct mlx5_fwdump_get {
	struct mlx5_tool_addr devaddr;
	struct mlx5_fwdump_reg *buf;
	size_t reg_cnt;
	size_t reg_filled; /* out */
};
.Ed
.Pp
On successful return, the
.Dv reg_filled
field reports the number of the
.Dv buf
array elements actually filled with the registers values.
If
.Dv buf
contains the
.Dv NULL
pointer, no registers are filled, but
.Dv reg_filled
still contains the number of registers that should be passed for
the complete dump.
.Pp
The
.Vt struct mlx5_fwdump_reg
element contains the address of the register in the field
.Dv addr ,
and its value in the field
.Dv val .
.Bd -literal
struct mlx5_fwdump_reg {
	uint32_t addr;
	uint32_t val;
};
.Ed
.It Dv MLX5_FW_UPDATE
Requests firmware update (flash) on the adapter specified by the
.Dv devaddr
using the firmware image in
.Dv MFA2
format.
The argument for the ioctl command is the
.Vt struct mlx5_fw_update
with the following definition.
.Bd -literal
struct mlx5_fw_update {
	struct mlx5_tool_addr devaddr;
	void *img_fw_data;
	size_t img_fw_data_len;
};
.Ed
Image address in memory is passed in
.Dv img_fw_data ,
the length of the image is specified in
.Dv img_fw_data_len
field.
.It Dv MLX5_FW_RESET
Requests PCIe link-level reset on the device.
The address of the device is specified by the
.Vt struct mlx5_tool_addr
structure, which should be passed as an argument.
.It Dv MLX5_EEPROM_GET
Fetch EEPROM information.
The argument to the command should point to the input/output
.Vt struct mlx5_eeprom_get
structure where, the
.Dv devaddr
field specifies the address of the device.
.Bd -literal
struct mlx5_eeprom_get {
        struct mlx5_tool_addr devaddr;
        size_t eeprom_info_page_valid;
        uint32_t *eeprom_info_buf;
        size_t eeprom_info_out_len;
};
.Ed
.Pp
On successful return, the
.Dv eeprom_info_out_len
field reports the length of the EEPROM information.
.Dv eeprom_info_buf
field contains the actual EEPROM information.
.Dv eeprom_info_page_valid
field reports the third page validity.
.El
.Sh FILES
The
.Pa /dev/mlx5ctl
.Xr devfs 5
node is used to pass commands to the driver.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful, the IOCTL returns zero.
Otherwise, -1 is returned and the global variable
.Va errno
is set to indicate the error.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr errno 2 ,
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr mlx5en 4 ,
.Xr mlx5ib 4 ,
.Xr mlx5tool 8
and
.Xr pci 9 .
