.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Netflix, Inc
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" mpi3mr driver man page.
.\"
.Dd June 14, 2023
.Dt MPI3MR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mpi3mr
.Nd "Broadcom MPIMR 3.0 IT/IR 24Gb/s SAS Tri-Mode RAID PCIe 4.0 driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.\" To compile this driver into the kernel, place these lines in the kernel
.\" configuration file:
.\" .Bd -ragged -offset indent
.\" .Cd "device pci"
.\" .Cd "device scbus"
.\" .Cd "device mpi3mr"
.\" .Ed
.\" .Pp
The driver can be loaded as a module at boot time by placing this line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mpi3mr_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Broadcom Ltd. MPIMR 3.0 IT/IR PCIe 4 controller.
.Sh HARDWARE
These controllers are supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Broadcom Ltd. SAS 4116 Tri-Mode RAID Adapter
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9670W-16i 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9670-24i 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9660-16i 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9620-16i 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9600-24i 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9600-16i 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9600W-16e 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9600-16e 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.It
Broadcom Ltd. 9600-8i8e 24G PCIe 4.0 Tri-Mode RAID Adapters
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr mpr 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 14.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Sumit Saxena Aq Mt sumit.saxena@broadcom.com ,
and
.An Chandrakanth Patil Aq Mt chandrakanth.patil@broadcom.com .
This manual page was written by
.An Warner Losh Aq Mt imp@FreeBSD.org .
