.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Spectra Logic Corporation
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 LSI Corp
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce at minimum a disclaimer
.\"    substantially similar to the "NO WARRANTY" disclaimer below
.\"    ("Disclaimer") and any redistribution must be conditioned upon
.\"    including a substantially similar Disclaimer requirement for further
.\"    binary redistribution.
.\"
.\" NO WARRANTY
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" HOLDERS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING
.\" IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.
.\" 
.\" mpr driver man page.
.\"
.\" Author: Ken Merry <ken@FreeBSD.org>
.\" Author: Stephen McConnell <stephen.mcconnell@lsi.com>
.\"
.\" $Id$
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 2, 2014
.Dt MPR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mpr
.Nd "LSI Fusion-MPT 3 IT/IR 12Gb/s Serial Attached SCSI/SATA driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel, place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Cd "device mpr"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mpr_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm 
driver provides support for LSI Fusion-MPT 3 IT/IR
.Tn SAS
controllers.
.Sh HARDWARE
The following controllers are supported by the
.Nm
driver:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
LSI SAS 3004 (4 Port SAS)
.It
LSI SAS 3008 (8 Port SAS)
.It
LSI SAS 3108 (8 Port SAS)
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
To disable MSI interrupts for all
.Nm
driver instances, set the following tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.disable_msi=1
.Ed
.Pp
To disable MSI interrupts for a specific
.Nm
driver instance, set the following tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.disable_msi=1
.Ed
.Pp
where X is the adapter number.
.Pp
To disable MSI-X interrupts for all
.Nm
driver instances, set the following tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.disable_msix=1
.Ed
.Pp
To disable MSI-X interrupts for a specific
.Nm
driver instance, set the following tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.disable_msix=1
.Ed
.Pp
To set the maximum number of DMA chains allocated for all adapters, set
the following variable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.max_chains=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
To set the maximum number of DMA chains allocated for a specific adapter,
set the following variable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.max_chains=NNNN
.Ed
.Pp
This variable may also be viewed via
.Xr sysctl 8
to see the maximum set for a given adapter.
.Pp
The current number of free chain frames may be seen via the
dev.mpr.X.chain_free
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
The lowest number of free chain frames may be seen via the
dev.mpr.X.chain_free_lowwater
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
The current number of active I/O commands is shown in the
dev.mpr.X.io_cmds_active
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
The maximum number of active I/O commands seen since boot is shown in the
dev.mpr.X.io_cmds_highwater
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Pp
Devices can be excluded from
.Nm
control for all adapters by setting the following variable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.exclude_ids=Y
.Ed
.Pp
where Y is the target ID of the device.
If more than one device is to be
excluded, target ID's are separated by commas.
.Pp
Devices can be excluded from
.Nm
control for a specific adapter by setting the following variable in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dev.mpr.X.exclude_ids=Y
.Ed
.Pp
where X is the adapter number and Y is the target ID of the device.
If more
than one device is to be excluded, target ID's are separated by commas.
.Sh DEBUGGING
To enable debugging prints from the
.Nm
driver, set the
.Bd -literal -offset indent
hw.mpr.X.debug_level
.Ed
.Pp
variable, where X is the adapter number, either in
.Xr loader.conf 5
or via
.Xr sysctl 8 .
The following bits have the described effects:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
0x0001 Enable informational prints.
0x0002 Enable prints for driver faults.
0x0004 Enable prints for controller events.
0x0008 Enable prints for controller logging.
0x0010 Enable prints for tracing recovery operations.
0x0020 Enable prints for parameter errors and programming bugs.
0x0040 Enable prints for system initialization operations.
0x0080 Enable prints for more detailed information.
0x0100 Enable prints for user-generated commands.
0x0200 Enable prints for device mapping.
0x0400 Enable prints for tracing through driver functions.
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr mps 4 ,
.Xr mpt 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr targ 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in FreeBSD 9.3.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was originally written by
.An -nosplit
.An Scott Long Aq Mt scottl@FreeBSD.org .
It has been improved and tested by LSI Corporation.
.Pp
This man page was written by
.An Ken Merry Aq Mt ken@FreeBSD.org
with additional input from
.An Stephen McConnell Aq Mt stephen.mcconnell@lsi.com .
