.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2014 LSI Corp
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" Author: Kashyap Desai
.\" Support: freebsdraid@lsi.com
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the <ORGANIZATION> nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived
.\"    from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS
.\" FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
.\" COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" The views and conclusions contained in the software and documentation
.\" are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing
.\" official policies, either expressed or implied, of the FreeBSD Project.
.\"
.Dd August 22, 2025
.Dt MRSAS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm mrsas
.Nd Broadcom/LSI MegaRAID 6/12Gb/s SAS+SATA RAID controller driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device mrsas"
.Pp
In
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Cd mrsas_load="YES"
.Pp
In
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 :
.Cd dev.mrsas.X.disable_ocr
.Cd dev.mrsas.X.fw_outstanding
.Cd dev.mrsas.X.mrsas_fw_fault_check_delay
.Cd dev.mrsas.X.mrsas_io_timeout
.Cd hw.mrsas.X.debug_level
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver will detect Broadcom/LSI's 6Gb/s and 12Gb/s
PCI Express SAS/SATA/NVMe RAID controllers.
A disk
.Pq virtual disk/physical disk
attached to the
.Nm
driver will be visible to the user through
.Xr camcontrol 8
as
.Pa /dev/da?
device nodes.
A simple management interface is also provided per-controller via the
.Pa /dev/mrsas?
device node.
.Pp
The
.Nm
name is derived from the phrase "MegaRAID SAS HBA", which is
substantially different than the old "MegaRAID" Driver
.Xr mfi 4
which does not connect targets to the
.Xr cam 4
layer and thus requires a new driver which attaches targets to the
.Xr cam 4
layer.
Older MegaRAID controllers are supported by
.Xr mfi 4
and will not work with
.Nm ,
but both the
.Xr mfi 4
and
.Nm
drivers can detect and manage the
Broadcom/LSI MegaRAID SAS 2208/2308/3008/3108 series of controllers.
.Pp
The
.Xr device.hints 5
option is provided to tune the
.Nm
driver's behavior for LSI MegaRAID SAS 2208/2308/3008/3108 controllers.
By default, the
.Xr mfi 4
driver will detect these controllers.
See the
.Sx PRIORITY
section to know more about driver priority for MR-Fusion devices.
.Pp
.Nm
will provide a priority of (-30) (between
.Dv BUS_PROBE_DEFAULT
and
.Dv BUS_PROBE_LOW_PRIORITY )
at probe call for device id's 0x005B, 0x005D, and
0x005F so that
.Nm
does not take control of these devices without user intervention.
.Pp
Solid-state drives (SSD) get ATA TRIM support with
.Nm
if underlying adapter allows it.
This may require configuring SSD as Non-RAID drive
rather then JBOD virtual mode.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following LSI/Broadcom SATA/SAS RAID controllers:
.Pp
.Bl -column -compact "LSI MegaRAID SAS 9380" "Invader/Fury" "12Gb/s"
.It Controller Ta Chip Ta Speed
.It Broadcom SAS3916 Ta Aero Ta 12Gb/s
.It Broadcom SAS3908 Ta Aero Ta 12Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9380 Ta Invader/Fury Ta 12Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9361 Ta Invader/Fury Ta 12Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9341 Ta Invader/Fury Ta 12Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9286 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9285 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9272 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9271 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9270 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9267 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9266 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI MegaRAID SAS 9265 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI SAS 3108 Ta Ta 12Gb/s
.It LSI SAS 3008 Ta Ta 12Gb/s
.It LSI SAS 2308 Ta Ta 6Gb/s
.It LSI SAS 2208 Ta Ta 6Gb/s
.It DELL PERC H830 Ta Invader/Fury Ta 12Gb/s
.It DELL PERC H810 Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It DELL PERC H730/P Ta Invader/Fury Ta 12Gb/s
.It DELL PERC H710/P Ta Thunderbolt Ta 6Gb/s
.It DELL PERC H330 Ta Invader/Fury Ta 12Gb/s
.El
.Sh CONFIGURATION
To disable Online Controller Reset(OCR) for a specific
.Nm
driver instance, set the
following tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Pp
.Dl Va dev.mrsas.X.disable_ocr=1
.Pp
where X is the adapter number.
.Pp
To change the I/O timeout value for a specific
.Nm
driver instance, set the following tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Pp
.Dl Va dev.mrsas.X.mrsas_io_timeout=NNNNNN
.Pp
where NNNNNN is the timeout value in milli-seconds.
.Pp
To change the firmware fault check timer value for a specific
.Nm
driver instance, set the following tunable value in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Pp
.Dl Va dev.mrsas.X.mrsas_fw_fault_check_delay=NN
.Pp
where NN is the fault check delay value in seconds.
.Pp
The current number of active I/O commands is shown in the
.Va dev.mrsas.X.fw_outstanding
.Xr sysctl 8
variable.
.Sh DEBUGGING
To enable debugging prints from the
.Nm
driver, set the
.Va hw.mrsas.X.debug_level
variable, where X is the adapter number, either in
.Xr loader.conf 5
or via
.Xr sysctl 8 .
The following bits have the described effects:
.Bl -tag -width indent -offset indent
.It 0x01
Enable informational prints.
.It 0x02
Enable tracing prints.
.It 0x04
Enable prints for driver faults.
.It 0x08
Enable prints for OCR and I/O timeout.
.It 0x10
Enable prints for AEN events.
.El
.Sh PRIORITY
The
.Nm
driver will always set a default (-30) priority in the PCI subsystem for
selection of MR-Fusion cards.
(It is between
.Dv BUS_PROBE_DEFAULT
and
.Dv BUS_PROBE_LOW_PRIORITY ) .
MR-Fusion Controllers include all cards with the
Device IDs -
0x005B,
0x005D,
0x005F.
.Pp
The
.Xr mfi 4
driver will set a priority of either
.Dv BUS_PROBE_DEFAULT
or
.Dv BUS_PROBE_LOW_PRIORITY
(depending on the device.hints setting) in the PCI
subsystem for selection of MR-Fusion cards.
With the above design in place, the
.Xr mfi 4
driver will attach to a MR-Fusion card
given that it has a higher priority than
.Nm .
.Pp
Using
.Pa /boot/device.hints
(as mentioned below), the user can provide a preference
for the
.Nm
driver to detect a MR-Fusion card instead of the
.Xr mfi 4
driver.
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd hw.mfi.mrsas_enable="1"
.Ed
.Pp
At boot time, the
.Xr mfi 4
driver will get priority to detect MR-Fusion controllers by default.
Before
changing this default driver selection policy,
LSI advises users to understand how the driver selection policy works.
LSI's policy is to provide priority to
the
.Xr mfi 4
driver to detect MR-Fusion cards,
but allow for the ability to choose the
.Nm
driver to detect MR-Fusion cards.
.Pp
LSI recommends setting
.Va hw.mfi.mrsas_enable="0"
for customers who are using the older
.Xr mfi 4
driver and do not want to switch to
.Nm .
For those using a MR-Fusion controller for the first time,
LSI recommends using the
.Nm
driver and setting
.Va hw.mfi.mrsas_enable="1".
.Pp
Changing the default behavior is well tested under most conditions,
but unexpected behavior may pop up
if more complex and unrealistic operations are executed
by switching between the
.Xr mfi 4
and
.Nm
drivers for MR-Fusion.
Switching drivers is designed to happen only one time.
Although multiple switching is possible, it is not recommended.
The user should decide from
.Sy boot
which driver they want to use for the MR-Fusion card.
.Pp
The user may see different device names when switching from
.Xr mfi 4
to
.Nm .
This behavior
.Sy works as intended
and the user needs to change the
.Xr fstab 5
entry manually if they are doing any experiments with
.Xr mfi 4
and
.Nm
interoperability.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "/dev/mrsas?" -compact
.It Pa /dev/da?
array/logical disk interface
.It Pa /dev/mrsas?
management interface
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cam 4 ,
.Xr mfi 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr device.hints 5 ,
.Xr camcontrol 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 10.1 .
.Bd -ragged
.Cd "mfi Driver:"
.Xr mfi 4
is the old
.Fx
driver which started with support for Gen-1 Controllers and
was extended to support up to MR-Fusion
.Pq Device ID = 0x005B, 0x005D, 0x005F .
.Ed
.Bd -ragged
.Cd "mrsas Driver:"
.Nm
is the new driver reworked by LSI which supports Thunderbolt and onward
products.
The SAS+SATA RAID controller with device id 0x005b is referred to as
the Thunderbolt controller throughout this man page.
.Ed
.Bd -ragged
.Sy cam aware HBA drivers:
.Fx
has a
.Xr cam 4
layer which attaches storage devices and provides a
common access mechanism to storage controllers and attached devices.
The
.Nm
driver is
.Xr cam 4
aware and devices associated with
.Nm
can be seen using
.Xr camcontrol 8 .
The
.Xr mfi 4
driver does not understand the
.Xr cam 4
layer and it directly associates storage disks to the block layer.
.Pp
.Sy Thunderbolt Controller:
This is the 6Gb/s MegaRAID HBA card which has device id 0x005B.
.Pp
.Sy Invader Controller:
This is 12Gb/s MegaRAID HBA card which has device id 0x005D.
.Pp
.Sy Fury Controller:
This is the 12Gb/s MegaRAID HBA card which has device id 0x005F.
.Ed
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page were written by
.An Kashyap Desai Aq Mt Kashyap.Desai@lsi.com .
.Sh CAVEATS
The
.Nm
driver exposes devices as
.Pa /dev/da? ,
whereas
.Xr mfi 4
exposes devices as
.Pa /dev/mfid? .
.Pp
.Nm
does not support the Linux Emulator Interface,
.Xr mfiutil 8 ,
or device name aliases for switching drivers without editing
.Xr fstab 5 .
