.\" Copyright (C) 2003 The FreeBSD Project. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Noriaki Mitsunaga. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 18, 2003
.Dt NCV 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ncv
.Nd "NCR 53C500 based SCSI host adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ncv"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides access to the
.Tn SCSI bus
connected to an NCR 53C500 based
PC-Card
.Tn SCSI
host adapter or an Adaptec AHA-2920 on the
.Tn PCI
bus.
.Pp
The following devices are currently supported:
.Pp
.Bl -item -compact
.It
I-O DATA PCSC-DV
.It
KME KXLC002 (TAXAN ICD-400PN, etc.), KXLC004, and UJDCD450
.It
Macnica Miracle SCSI-II mPS110
.It
Media Intelligent MSC-110, MSC-200
.It
NEC PC-9801N-J03R
.It
New Media Corporation BASICS SCSI
.It
Qlogic Fast SCSI
.It
RATOC REX-9530, REX-5572 (SCSI only)
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The following error messages are sometimes returned:
.Bl -diag
.It
SCSI BUS RESET failed
.Pp
Usually returned when a failure occurs during
the bus reset.
.It
CMD_NOP failed
.Pp
No operation or the operation has failed.
.It
CMD_NOP|CMD_DMA
.Pp
A failure occurred during the
.Tn DMA
read/write operations.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver should return
.Bq Er ENODEV
when any of the previously noted failures occur.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr pccard 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver has been developed for
.Nx
pc98
and ported to
.Fx .
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.2
with
.Tn PAO
and merged in
.Fx 4.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Naofumi Honda .
This manual page was written by
.An -nosplit
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Noriaki Mitsunaga Aq non@FreeBSD.org .
