.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2022 Alexander Chernikov <melifaro@FreeBSD.org>.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 30, 2022
.Dt NETLINK 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm Netlink
.Nd Kernel network configuration protocol
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netlink/netlink.h
.In netlink/netlink_route.h
.Ft int
.Fn socket AF_NETLINK SOCK_RAW "int family"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Netlink is a user-kernel message-based communication protocol primarily used
for network stack configuration.
Netlink is easily extendable and supports large dumps and event
notifications, all via a single socket.
The protocol is fully asynchronous, allowing one to issue and track multiple
requests at once.
Netlink consists of multiple families, which commonly group the commands
belonging to the particular kernel subsystem.
Currently, the supported families are:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
NETLINK_ROUTE	network configuration,
NETLINK_GENERIC	"container" family
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Dv NETLINK_ROUTE
family handles all interfaces, addresses, neighbors, routes, and VNETs
configuration.
More details can be found in
.Xr rtnetlink 4 .
The
.Dv NETLINK_GENERIC
family serves as a
.Do container Dc ,
allowing registering other families under the
.Dv NETLINK_GENERIC
umbrella.
This approach allows using a single netlink socket to interact with
multiple netlink families at once.
More details can be found in
.Xr genetlink 4 .
.Pp
Netlink has its own sockaddr structure:
.Bd -literal
struct sockaddr_nl {
	uint8_t		nl_len;		/* sizeof(sockaddr_nl) */
	sa_family_t	nl_family;	/* netlink family */
	uint16_t	nl_pad;		/* reserved, set to 0 */
	uint32_t	nl_pid;		/* automatically selected, set to 0 */
	uint32_t	nl_groups;	/* multicast groups mask to bind to */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Typically, filling this structure is not required for socket operations.
It is presented here for completeness.
.Sh PROTOCOL DESCRIPTION
The protocol is message-based.
Each message starts with the mandatory
.Va nlmsghdr
header, followed by the family-specific header and the list of
type-length-value pairs (TLVs).
TLVs can be nested.
All headers and TLVS are padded to 4-byte boundaries.
Each
.Xr send 2 or
.Xr recv 2
system call may contain multiple messages.
.Ss BASE HEADER
.Bd -literal
struct nlmsghdr {
	uint32_t nlmsg_len;   /* Length of message including header */
	uint16_t nlmsg_type;  /* Message type identifier */
	uint16_t nlmsg_flags; /* Flags (NLM_F_) */
	uint32_t nlmsg_seq;   /* Sequence number */
	uint32_t nlmsg_pid;   /* Sending process port ID */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va nlmsg_len
field stores the whole message length, in bytes, including the header.
This length has to be rounded up to the nearest 4-byte boundary when
iterating over messages.
The
.Va nlmsg_type
field represents the command/request type.
This value is family-specific.
The list of supported commands can be found in the relevant family
header file.
.Va nlmsg_seq
is a user-provided request identifier.
An application can track the operation result using the
.Dv NLMSG_ERROR
messages and matching the
.Va nlmsg_seq
.
The
.Va nlmsg_pid
field is the message sender id.
This field is optional for userland.
The kernel sender id is zero.
The
.Va nlmsg_flags
field contains the message-specific flags.
The following generic flags are defined:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
NLM_F_REQUEST	Indicates that the message is an actual request to the kernel
NLM_F_ACK	Request an explicit ACK message with an operation result
.Ed
.Pp
The following generic flags are defined for the "GET" request types:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
NLM_F_ROOT	Return the whole dataset
NLM_F_MATCH	Return all entries matching the criteria
.Ed
These two flags are typically used together, aliased to
.Dv NLM_F_DUMP
.Pp
The following generic flags are defined for the "NEW" request types:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
NLM_F_CREATE	Create an object if none exists
NLM_F_EXCL	Don't replace an object if it exists
NLM_F_REPLACE	Replace an existing matching object
NLM_F_APPEND	Append to an existing object
.Ed
.Pp
The following generic flags are defined for the replies:
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
NLM_F_MULTI	Indicates that the message is part of the message group
NLM_F_DUMP_INTR	Indicates that the state dump was not completed
NLM_F_DUMP_FILTERED	Indicates that the dump was filtered per request
NLM_F_CAPPED	Indicates the original message was capped to its header
NLM_F_ACK_TLVS	Indicates that extended ACK TLVs were included
.Ed
.Ss TLVs
Most messages encode their attributes as type-length-value pairs (TLVs).
The base TLV header:
.Bd -literal
struct nlattr {
	uint16_t nla_len;	/* Total attribute length */
	uint16_t nla_type;	/* Attribute type */
};
.Ed
The TLV type
.Pq Va nla_type
scope is typically the message type or group within a family.
For example, the
.Dv RTN_MULTICAST
type value is only valid for
.Dv RTM_NEWROUTE
,
.Dv RTM_DELROUTE
and
.Dv RTM_GETROUTE
messages.
TLVs can be nested; in that case internal TLVs may have their own sub-types.
All TLVs are packed with 4-byte padding.
.Ss CONTROL MESSAGES
A number of generic control messages are reserved in each family.
.Pp
.Dv NLMSG_ERROR
reports the operation result if requested, optionally followed by
the metadata TLVs.
The value of
.Va nlmsg_seq
is set to its value in the original messages, while
.Va nlmsg_pid
is set to the socket pid of the original socket.
The operation result is reported via
.Vt "struct nlmsgerr":
.Bd -literal
struct nlmsgerr {
	int	error;		/* Standard errno */
	struct	nlmsghdr msg;	/* Original message header */
};
.Ed
If the
.Dv NETLINK_CAP_ACK
socket option is not set, the remainder of the original message will follow.
If the
.Dv NETLINK_EXT_ACK
socket option is set, the kernel may add a
.Dv NLMSGERR_ATTR_MSG
string TLV with the textual error description, optionally followed by the
.Dv NLMSGERR_ATTR_OFFS
TLV, indicating the offset from the message start that triggered an error.
Some operations may return additional metadata encapsulated in the
.Dv NLMSGERR_ATTR_COOKIE
TLV.
The metadata format is specific to the operation.
If the operation reply is a multipart message, then no
.Dv NLMSG_ERROR
reply is generated, only a
.Dv NLMSG_DONE
message, closing multipart sequence.
.Pp
.Dv NLMSG_DONE
indicates the end of the message group: typically, the end of the dump.
It contains a single
.Vt int
field, describing the dump result as a standard errno value.
.Sh SOCKET OPTIONS
Netlink supports a number of custom socket options, which can be set with
.Xr setsockopt 2
with the
.Dv SOL_NETLINK
.Fa level :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv NETLINK_ADD_MEMBERSHIP
Subscribes to the notifications for the specific group (int).
.It Dv NETLINK_DROP_MEMBERSHIP
Unsubscribes from the notifications for the specific group (int).
.It Dv NETLINK_LIST_MEMBERSHIPS
Lists the memberships as a bitmask.
.It Dv NETLINK_CAP_ACK
Instructs the kernel to send the original message header in the reply
without the message body.
.It Dv NETLINK_EXT_ACK
Acknowledges ability to receive additional TLVs in the ACK message.
.El
.Pp
Additionally, netlink overrides the following socket options from the
.Dv SOL_SOCKET
.Fa level :
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv SO_RCVBUF
Sets the maximum size of the socket receive buffer.
If the caller has
.Dv PRIV_NET_ROUTE
permission, the value can exceed the currently-set
.Va kern.ipc.maxsockbuf
value.
.El
.Sh SYSCTL VARIABLES
A set of
.Xr sysctl 8
variables is available to tweak run-time parameters:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va net.netlink.sendspace
Default send buffer for the netlink socket.
Note that the socket sendspace has to be at least as long as the longest
message that can be transmitted via this socket.
.El
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va net.netlink.recvspace
Default receive buffer for the netlink socket.
Note that the socket recvspace has to be least as long as the longest
message that can be received from this socket.
.El
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va net.netlink.nl_maxsockbuf
Maximum receive buffer for the netlink socket that can be set via
.Dv SO_RCVBUF
socket option.
.El
.Sh DEBUGGING
Netlink implements per-functional-unit debugging, with different severities
controllable via the
.Va net.netlink.debug
branch.
These messages are logged in the kernel message buffer and can be seen in
.Xr dmesg 8
.
The following severity levels are defined:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv LOG_DEBUG(7)
Rare events or per-socket errors are reported here.
This is the default level, not impacting production performance.
.It Dv LOG_DEBUG2(8)
Socket events such as groups memberships, privilege checks, commands and dumps
are logged.
This level does not incur significant performance overhead.
.It Dv LOG_DEBUG3(9)
All socket events, each dumped or modified entities are logged.
Turning it on may result in significant performance overhead.
.El
.Sh ERRORS
Netlink reports operation results, including errors and error metadata, by
sending a
.Dv NLMSG_ERROR
message for each request message.
The following errors can be returned:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EPERM
when the current privileges are insufficient to perform the required operation;
.It Bo Er ENOBUFS Bc or Bo Er ENOMEM Bc
when the system runs out of memory for
an internal data structure;
.It Bq Er ENOTSUP
when the requested command is not supported by the family or
the family is not supported;
.It Bq Er EINVAL
when some necessary TLVs are missing or invalid, detailed info
may be provided in NLMSGERR_ATTR_MSG and NLMSGERR_ATTR_OFFS TLVs;
.It Bq Er ENOENT
when trying to delete a non-existent object.
.Pp
Additionally, a socket operation itself may fail with one of the errors
specified in
.Xr socket 2
,
.Xr recv 2
or
.Xr send 2
.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr genetlink 4 ,
.Xr rtnetlink 4
.Rs
.%A "J. Salim"
.%A "H. Khosravi"
.%A "A. Kleen"
.%A "A. Kuznetsov"
.%T "Linux Netlink as an IP Services Protocol"
.%O "RFC 3549"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The netlink protocol appeared in
.Fx 13.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The netlink was implemented by
.An -nosplit
.An Alexander Chernikov Aq Mt melifaro@FreeBSD.org .
It was derived from the Google Summer of Code 2021 project by
.An Ng Peng Nam Sean .
