.\"	$OpenBSD: nfe.4,v 1.7 2006/02/28 08:13:47 jsg Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Jonathan Gray <jsg@openbsd.org>
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 6, 2007
.Dt NFE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nfe
.Nd "NVIDIA nForce MCP Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device nfe"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_nfe_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports PCI Ethernet adapters based on the NVIDIA
nForce Media and Communications Processors (MCP), such as
the nForce, nForce 2, nForce 3, CK804, MCP04, MCP51 and MCP55
Ethernet controller chips.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Cm autoselect" -compact
.It Cm autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
.It Cm 10baseT
Set 10Mbps operation.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
.It Cm 1000baseT
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation (recent models only).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr polling 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Ox 3.9 ,
and then in
.Fx 6.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Jonathan Gray
.Aq jsg@openbsd.org
and
.An Damien Bergamini
.Aq damien@openbsd.org .
The
.Nm
driver was ported to
.Fx
by
.An Shigeaki Tagashira
.Aq shigeaki@se.hiroshima-u.ac.jp .
