.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2003
.\"	Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (FhG Fokus).
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Hartmut Brandt <harti@freebsd.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.\" ng_atm(4) man page
.\"
.Dd June 24, 2003
.Dt ng_atm 4
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_atm
.Nd netgraph ATM node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <net/if_atm.h>
.Fd #include <netgraph/ng_atm.h>
.Sh DESCIPTION
The
.Nm
netgraph node type allows
.Xr natm 4
ATM drivers to be connected to the 
.Xr netgraph 4
networking subsystem.
When the
.Nm
module is loaded a node is automatically create for each
.Xr natm 4
ATM interface. The nodes are named with the same name as the
interface. Nodes are also created, if a driver for an ATM
card is loaded after
.Nm
was loaded.
.Pp
.Nm
nodes are persistent. They are removed when the interface is removed.
SHUTDOWN messages are ignored by the node.
.Sh HOOKS
Four special hooks with fixed names and an unlimited number of hooks with user
defined names are supported. Three of the fixed hooks are attached to
strategic points in the information flow in the
.Xr natm 4
system and support only reading. The fourth fixed hook behaves like the other
user hooks, but a number of management messages are sent along the hook.
The other hooks can be attached to VCIs dynamically by means of
control messages to the
.Nm
node and can be written and read.
.Pp
The four fixed hooks are:
.Bl -tag -width orphans
.It Dv input
This is a connection to the raw input stream from the network.
If this hook is connected, all incoming packets are delivered out to
this hook. Note, that this redirects ALL input. Neither
.Xr natm 4
nor the user hooks will see any input if
.Dv input
is connected.
An
.Dv atm_pseudohdr
(see
.Xr natm 4 )
is prepended to the actual data.
.It Dv output
This is a connection to the raw output stream to the network device.
If this hook is connected, all outgoing packets are handed over to
the netgraph system and delivered to the hook instead of beeing delivered
to the ATM driver.
An
.Dv atm_pseudohdr
(see
.Xr natm 4 )
is prepended to the actual data.
.It Dv orphans
This hook receives all packets that are unrecognized, i.e. do not belong to
either a
.Xr natm 4
socket, a
.Nm
VCI or
.Xr natm 4
IP.
Because ATM is connection oriented and packets are received on a given VCI only
when someone initiates this VCI, packets should never be orphaned. There is
however one exception: if you use
.Xr natm 4
IP with LLC/SNAP encapsulation packets with don't have the IP protocol
indicated in the packet header are delivered out of this hook.
An
.Dv atm_pseudohdr
(see
.Xr natm 4 )
is prepended to the actual data send out to the hook.
.It Dv manage
This hook behaves exactly like a normal user hook (see below) except, that
the node at the other hand will receive management messages.
.El
.Pp
Hooks for dynamically initiated VCIs can have whatever name is allowed by
.Xr netgraph 4 
as long as the name does not collide with one of the three predefined names.
.Pp
To initiate packet sending an receiving on a dynamic hook one has to issue
a
.Dv NGM_ATM_CPCS_INIT
control message. To terminate sending and receiving one must send a
.Dv NGM_ATM_CPCS_TERM
message (see
.Sx CONTROL MESSAGES ) . 
The data send and received on these hooks has no additional
headers.
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic messages plus the following:
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Dv NGM_ATM_GET_IFNAME
Return the name of the interface as a NUL-terminated string.
This is normally the same name as that of the node.
.It Dv NGM_ATM_GET_CONFIG
Returns a structure defining the configuration of the interface:
.Bd -literal
struct ng_atm_config {
	uint32_t	pcr;		/* peak cell rate */
	uint32_t	maxvpi;		/* maximum vpi */
	uint32_t	maxvci;		/* maximum vci */
	uint32_t	max_vpcs;	/* maximum number of VPCs */
	uint32_t	max_vccs;	/* maximum number of VCCs */
};
.Ed
.It Dv NGM_ATM_GET_VCCS
Returns the table of open VCCs from the driver. This table consists of
a header and a variable sized array of entries, one for each open vcc:
.Bd -literal
struct atmio_vcctable {
	uint32_t	count;		/* number of vccs */
	struct atmio_vcc vccs[0];	/* array of VCCs */
};
struct atmio_vcc {
	uint16_t	flags;		/* flags */
	uint16_t	vpi;		/* VPI */
	uint16_t	vci;		/* VCI */
	uint16_t	rmtu;		/* Receive maximum CPCS size */
	uint16_t	tmtu;		/* Transmit maximum CPCS size */
	uint8_t		aal;		/* aal type */
	uint8_t		traffic;	/* traffic type */
	struct atmio_tparam tparam;	/* traffic parameters */
};
struct atmio_tparam {
	uint32_t	pcr;	/* 24bit: Peak Cell Rate */
	uint32_t	scr;	/* 24bit: VBR Sustainable Cell Rate */
	uint32_t	mbs;	/* 24bit: VBR Maximum burst size */
	uint32_t	mcr;	/* 24bit: MCR */
	uint32_t	icr;	/* 24bit: ABR ICR */
	uint32_t	tbe;	/* 24bit: ABR TBE (1...2^24-1) */
	uint8_t		nrm;	/*  3bit: ABR Nrm */
	uint8_t		trm;	/*  3bit: ABR Trm */
	uint16_t	adtf;	/* 10bit: ABR ADTF */
	uint8_t		rif;	/*  4bit: ABR RIF */
	uint8_t		rdf;	/*  4bit: ABR RDF */
	uint8_t		cdf;	/*  3bit: ABR CDF */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Note, that this is the driver's table, so all VCCs opened via
.Xr natm 4
sockets and IP are also shown. They can, however, be distinguished by
their flags. The
.Dv flags
field contains the following flags:
.Bl -column ATM_PH_LLCSNAP -offset indent
.It Dv ATM_PH_AAL5 Ta use AAL5 instead of AAL0
.It Dv ATM_PH_LLCSNAP Ta if AAL5 use LLC SNAP encapsulation
.It Dv ATM_FLAG_NG Ta this is a netgraph VCC
.It Dv ATM_FLAG_HARP Ta this is a HARP VCC
.It Dv ATM_FLAG_NORX Ta transmit only VCC
.It Dv ATM_FLAG_NOTX Ta receive only VCC
.It Dv ATMIO_FLAG_PVC Ta treat channel as a PVC
.El
.Pp
If the
.Dv ATM_FLAG_NG
flag is set, then
.Dv traffic
and
.Dv tparam
contain meaningful information.
.Pp
.Dv aal
contains one of the following values:
.Bl -column ATM_PH_LLCSNAP -offset indent
.It Dv ATMIO_AAL_0 Ta AAL 0 (raw cells)
.It Dv ATMIO_AAL_34 Ta AAL 3 or AAL 4
.It Dv ATMIO_AAL_5 Ta AAL 5
.It Dv ATMIO_AAL_RAW Ta device specific raw cells
.El
.Pp
.Dv traffic
can have one of the following values (not all drivers support
all traffic types however):
.Bl -column ATM_PH_LLCSNAP -offset indent
.It Dv ATMIO_TRAFFIC_UBR
.It Dv ATMIO_TRAFFIC_CBR
.It Dv ATMIO_TRAFFIC_ABR
.It Dv ATMIO_TRAFFIC_VBR
.El
.It Dv NGM_ATM_CPCS_INIT
Initialize a VCC for sending and receiving. The argument is a structure:
.Bd -literal
struct ng_atm_cpcs_init {
	char		name[NG_HOOKLEN + 1];
	uint32_t	flags;		/* flags. (if_natmio.h) */
	uint16_t	vci;		/* VCI to open */
	uint16_t	vpi;		/* VPI to open */
	uint16_t	rmtu;		/* receive maximum PDU */
	uint16_t	tmtu;		/* transmit maximum PDU */
	uint8_t		aal;		/* AAL type (if_natmio.h) */
	uint8_t		traffic;	/* traffic type (if_natmio.h) */
	uint32_t	pcr;		/* Peak cell rate */
	uint32_t	scr;		/* Sustainable cell rate */
	uint32_t	mbs;		/* Maximum burst size */
	uint32_t	mcr;		/* Minimum cell rate */
	uint32_t	icr;		/* ABR: Initial cell rate */
	uint32_t	tbe;		/* ABR: Transmit buffer exposure */
	uint8_t		nrm;		/* ABR: Nrm */
	uint8_t		trm;		/* ABR: Trm */
	uint16_t	adtf;		/* ABR: ADTF */
	uint8_t		rif;		/* ABR: RIF */
	uint8_t		rdf;		/* ABR: RDF */
	uint8_t		cdf;		/* ABR: CDF */
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Dv name
is the name of the hook for which sending and receiving should be enabled.
This hook must already be connected.
.Dv vpi
and
.Dv vci
are the respective VPI and VCI values to use for the ATM cells. They must be
withing the range, given by the 
.Dv maxvpi
and
.Dv maxvci
fields of the
.Dv ng_atm_config
structure.
.Dv flags
contains the flags (see above) and the other fields describe the
type of traffic.
.It Dv NGM_ATM_CPCS_TERM
Stop sending and receiving on the indicated hook. The argument is a
.Bd -literal
struct ng_atm_cpcs_term {
	char		name[NG_HOOKLEN + 1];
};
.Ed
.Sh MANAGEMENT MESSAGES
If the
.Dv manage
hook is connected certain messages are sent along the hook. They are
received by the peer node with a cookie of
.Dv NG_ATM_COOKIE .
.Bl -tag -width xxx
.It Dv NGM_ATM_CARRIER_CHANGE
The carrier state of the ATM physical interface has changed.
The message has the following structure:
.Bd -literal
struct ng_atm_carrier_change {
	uint32_t	node;
	uint32_t	state;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Dv node
is the node Id of the ATM node. This can be used by the managing entity
(for example
.Xr ilmid 8 )
to manage several interfaces at the same time through the same node.
.Dv state is 1 if the carrier was detected and 0 if it was lost.
.It Dv NGM_ATM_VCC_CHANGE
A permanent VCC has been added, deleted or changed. This is used by
.Xr ilmid
to generate the appropriate ILMI traps. The structure of the message is:
.Bd -literal
struct ng_atm_vcc_change {
	uint32_t	node;
	uint16_t	vci;
	uint8_t		vpi;
	uint8_t		state;
};
.Ed
Where
.Dv state
is 0 if the PVC was deleted and 1 if it was added or modified.
.El
.Sh FLOW CONTROL
If the hardware driver supports it the node can emit flow control messages
along a user hook. The format of these messages is described in
.Pa netgraph/ng_message.h .
The
.Nm
node may generate
.Dv NGM_HIGH_WATER_PASSED and NGM_LOW_WATER_PASSED
messages. The first one indicates that the hardware driver has stopped output
on the channel and drops new packets, the second one reports that
output was reenabled. Currently the structures are not filled with
information.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
The nodes are persistent as long as the corresponding interface exists.
Upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
messages all hooks are disconnected and the node is reinitialized. All
VCCs opened via netgraph are closed. When the ATM interface is unloaded
the node disappears.
If the node is compiled with
.Dv NGATM_DEBUG
there is a sysctl
.Cm net.graph.atm.allow_shutdown
which when set to a non-zero values allows the nodes to shut down.
Note, that this is intended for development only and may lead to kernel
panics if set.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr natm 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Harti Brandt Aq harti@freebsd.org
