.\" ng_bluetooth.4
.\" 
.\" Copyright (c) 2001-2002 Maksim Yevmenkin <m_evmenkin@yahoo.com>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" 
.\" $Id: ng_bluetooth.4,v 1.2 2002/11/12 22:14:10 max Exp $
.\" $FreeBSD$
.Dd November 9, 2002
.Dt NG_BLUETOOTH 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bluetooth
.Nd placeholder for global Bluetooth variables
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In ng_bluetooth.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm 
module is a placeholder for global Bluetooth variables. All Bluetooth
variables can be examined and changed via
.Xr sysctl 8 .
.Sh BLUETOOTH VARIABLES
Below is the description of default variables. Each Bluetooth module
might add its own variables to the tree.
.Bl -tag -width foobar
.It net.bluetooth.version
A read only integer variable that shows the current version of the 
Bluetooth stack.
.It net.bluetooth.hci.command_timeout
A read-write interger variable that controls the Host Controller Interface
(HCI) command timeout (in seconds), i.e. how long the HCI layer will wait 
for the
.Dv Command_Complete
or
.Dv Command_Status
event from a Bluetooth device.
.It net.bluetooth.hci.connection_timeout
A read-write integer variable that controls the HCI connection timeout, i.e.
how long the HCI layer will wait for the 
.Dv Connection_Complete
event. Normaly this should not be required as Bluetooth devices have
connection timeout of their own and will send event back. This timeout 
is required to ensure that no connection will stall in case when the HCI 
transport layer is broken. Be careful when changing this variable. 
Make sure you understand what you are doing.
.It net.bluetooth.hci.watchdog_timeout
A read-write integer variable that controls the HCI connection watchdog
timeout in seconds), i.e. how long the HCI layer should wait before 
disconnecting an inactive baseband connection.
.Em This has not been implemented yet .
.It net.bluetooth.hci.max_neighbor_age
A read-write integer variable that controls time-to-live (in seconds) for
entries in the HCI neighbor cache. Every time a Bluetooth device performs
an
.Dv Inquiry
operation, the results will be put in cache. Later when a Bluetooth device 
establishes a baseband connection, it will try to find the matching entry in 
the cache and use it. This might speed up establishment of the baseband 
connection.
.It net.bluetooth.l2cap.rtx_timeout
A read-write integer variable that controls the Link Layer Control and 
Adaptation Protocol (L2CAP) Retransmission Timeout (RTX) (in seconds). 
Every time the L2CAP layer submits a control command, the RTX timeout is set. 
The value of the RTX timeout should be greater or equal to the value of 
the HCI connection timeout. Be careful when changing this variable. Make
sure you understand what you are doing.
.It net.bluetooth.l2cap.ertx_timeout
A read-write integer variable that controls the L2CAP Extended Retransmission 
Timeout (ERTX) (in seconds). In some cases remote peer may respond with
.Dv PENDING
status to the L2CAP control command. In this case the L2CAP command timeout 
is reset to the ERTX timeout value. The value of the ERTX timeout should be 
greater or equal to the value of the RTX timeout. Be careful when changing 
this variable. Make sure you understand what you are doing.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr ng_hci 4 ,
.Xr ng_l2cap 4 ,
.Xr ng_btsocket 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm 
module was implemented in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Maksim Yevmenkin Aq m_evmenkin@yahoo.com
