.\" Copyright (c) 2002 Mark Santcroos <marks@ripe.net>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 15, 2002
.Dt NG_DEVICE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_device
.Nd device netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_device.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
A
.Nm device
node is both a netgraph node and a system device interface.
When a
.Nm device
node is created, a new device entry appears which is accessible via the
regular file operators such as
.Xr open 2 ,
.Xr close 2 ,
.Xr read 2 ,
.Xr write 2 ,
etc.
.Pp
The first node is created as
.Pa /dev/ngd0 ,
all subsequent nodes
.Pa /dev/ngd1 , /dev/ngd2 ,
etc.
The only way a
.Nm device
node can be created is by a connection to the main
.Nm device
node by another type of
.Xr netgraph 4
node.
.Pp
When a node is shut down, the corresponding device is removed
and the device name becomes available for reuse by future
.Nm device
nodes.
.Pp
A
.Nm device
node has a single hook to which it connects to the requesting
.Xr netgraph 4
node.
All data coming in over the hook will be presented to the device
for
.Xr read 2 .
All data coming in from the device entry by
.Xr write 2
will be forwarded to the hook.
.Sh HOOKS
The
.Nm device
node has no named hooks.
There is one hook which is used for all interactions.
This is the hook created by the calling node.
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
The
.Nm device
node supports no special control messages.
All incoming messages from the
hook will be returned to the sender.
Additionally the node accepts
.Xr ioctl 2 Ns s
from the device entry.
These will be encapsulated into
.Xr netgraph 4
messages and send out to the hook.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message.
The associated interface is removed and becomes available
for use by future
.Nm device
nodes.
.Pp
Unlike most other node types, a
.Nm device
node does
.Em not
go away when all hooks have been disconnected; rather, an explicit
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message is required.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm device
node type was first implemented in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Mark Santcroos Aq marks@ripe.net
