.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Gleb Smirnoff
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 22, 2004
.Dt NG_FEC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_fec
.Nd netgraph Fast EtherChannel node
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netgraph/ng_fec.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm fec
node implements Ethernet port trunking using the
.Dq Cisco Fast EtherChannel
protocol.
Upon creation, a
.Nm fec
node creates a network interface associated with it.
Interfaces are named
.Dq Li fec0 ,
.Dq Li fec1 ,
etc.
New nodes take the first available unit.
.Sh HOOKS
The
.Nm fec
node accepts any hooks.
However it does not use them.
Under normal operation, a
.Nm fec
node should not have any hooks.
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
Interface membership in the FEC group is configured with the following
control messages:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_FEC_ADD_IFACE Pq Ic add_iface
Attach interface to the FEC group.
The target interface name is passed as a string argument.
.It Dv NGM_FEC_DEL_IFACE Pq Ic del_iface
Remove interface from the trunk.
The target interface name is passed as a string argument.
.El
.Pp
The following control messages define the forwarding method for a node:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_FEC_SET_MODE_MAC Pq Ic set_mode_mac
Forwarding decisions will be based on the link-layer MAC address of the destination.
.It Dv NGM_FEC_SET_MODE_INET Pq Ic set_mode_inet
Forwarding decisions will be based on the IP address of the destination.
.El
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following example script creates an
.Nm fec
node, attaches four Ethernet interfaces to it and
sets the forwarding method to be IP-address based:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/usr/sbin/ngctl -f- << SEQ
	mkpeer fec dummy fec
	msg fec0: add_iface "dc0"
	msg fec0: add_iface "dc1"
	msg fec0: add_iface "dc2"
	msg fec0: add_iface "dc3"
	msg fec0: set_mode_inet
SEQ
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm fec
node type was implemented in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm fec
node was written by
.An "Bill Paul" Aq wpaul@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An "Gleb Smirnoff" Aq glebius@FreeBSD.org .
