.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Whistle Communications, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by Whistle Communications;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use Whistle
.\"    Communications, Inc. trademarks, including the mark "WHISTLE
.\"    COMMUNICATIONS" on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" 
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 15, 2000
.Dt NG_ONE2MANY 4
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_one2many
.Nd packet multiplexing netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <netgraph/ng_one2many.h>
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm one2many
provides a simple mechanism for routing packets over several links
in a one-to-many (and in the reverse direction, many-to-one) fashion.
There is a single hook named
.Dv one ,
and multiple hooks named
.Dv many0 ,
.Dv many1 ,
etc.
Packets received on any of the
.Dv many
hooks are forwarded out the
.Dv one
hook.
Packets received on the
.Dv one
hook are forwarded out one of the
.Dv many
hooks; which hook is determined by the node's configured
transmit algorithm.
Packets are not altered in any way.
.Pp
Each of the connected many links may be considered to be up or down.
Packets are never delivered out a many hook that is down.
How a link is determined to be up or down depends on the node's
configured link failure detection algorithm.
.Sh TRANSMIT ALGORITHMS
At this time, the only algorithm for determing the outgoing
.Dv many
hook is a simple round-robin delivery algorithm.
Packets are delivered out the many hooks in sequential order.
.Pp
In the future other algorithms may be added as well.
.Sh LINK FAILURE DETECTION
At this time, the only algorithm for determining when a link
has failed, other than the hook being disconnected, is the
``manual'' algorithm: the node is explicitly told which of
the links are up via the
.Dv NGM_ONE2MANY_SET_CONFIG
control message (see below).
Newly connected links are down until configured otherwise.
.Pp
In the future other algorithms may be added as well.
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports up to
.Dv NG_ONE2MANY_MAX_LINKS
hooks named
.Dv many0 ,
.Dv many1 ,
etc.,
plus a single hook named
.Dv one .
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports the generic control messages, plus the
following:
.Bl -tag -width foo
.It Dv NGM_ONE2MANY_SET_CONFIG
Sets the node configuration using a
.Dv "struct ng_one2many_link_config"
as the control message argument:
.Bd -literal -offset 0
/* Node configuration structure */
struct ng_one2many_config {
  u_int32_t   xmitAlg;        /* how to distribute packets */
  u_int32_t   failAlg;        /* how to detect link failure */
  u_char      enabledLinks[NG_ONE2MANY_MAX_LINKS];
};
.Ed
.Pp
Currently, the only valid setting for the
.Dv xmitAlg
field is
.Dv NG_ONE2MANY_XMIT_ROUNDROBIN ;
this is also the default setting.
The only valid setting for
.Dv failAlg
is
.Dv NG_ONE2MANY_FAIL_MANUAL ;
this is also the default setting.
.It Dv NGM_ONE2MANY_GET_CONFIG
Returns the current node configuration in a
.Dv "struct ng_one2many_link_config" .
.It Dv NGM_ONE2MANY_GET_STATS
This command takes a 32 bit link number as an argument and
returns a
.Dv "struct ng_one2many_link_stats"
containing statistics for the corresponding
.Dv many
link, which may or may not be currently connected:
.Bd -literal -offset 0
/* Statistics structure (one for each link) */
struct ng_one2many_link_stats {
  u_int64_t   recvOctets;     /* total octets rec'd on link */
  u_int64_t   recvPackets;    /* total pkts rec'd on link */
  u_int64_t   xmitOctets;     /* total octets xmit'd on link */
  u_int64_t   xmitPackets;    /* total pkts xmit'd on link */
};
.Ed
.Pp
To access statistics for the
.Dv one
link, use the link number
.Dv -1 .
.It Dv NGM_ONE2MANY_CLR_STATS
This command takes a 32 bit link number as an argument and
clears the statistics for that link.
.It Dv NGM_ONE2MANY_GETCLR_STATS
Same as
.Dv NGM_ONE2MANY_GET_STATS ,
but also atomically clears the statistics for the link as well.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node shuts down upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, or when all hooks have been disconnected.
.Sh EXAMPLE
The following commands will set up Ethernet interfaces
.Dv fxp0
to deliver packets alternating over the physical interfaces
corresponding to networking interfaces
.Dv fxp0
through
.Dv fxp3 :
.Bd -literal -offset 0
  # Plumb nodes together
  ngctl mkpeer fxp0: ng_one2many upper one
  ngctl connect fxp0: fxp0:upper lower many0
  ngctl connect fxp1: fxp0:upper lower many1
  ngctl connect fxp2: fxp0:upper lower many2
  ngctl connect fxp3: fxp0:upper lower many3
  # Allow fxp1 through fxp3 to xmit/recv fxp0 frames
  ngctl msg fxp1: setpromisc 1
  ngctl msg fxp3: setpromisc 1
  ngctl msg fxp2: setpromisc 1
  ngctl msg fxp1: setautosrc 0
  ngctl msg fxp3: setautosrc 0
  ngctl msg fxp2: setautosrc 0
  # Configure all four links as up
  ngctl msg fxp0:upper \\
    setconfig "{ xmitAlg=1 failAlg=1 enabledLinks={ 1 1 1 1 } }"
  # Bring up interface
  ifconfig fxp0 192.168.1.1 netmask 0xfffffffc
.Ed
.Pp
With a similar setup on a peer machine (using the address
192.168.1.2), a point-to-point
Ethernet connection with four times normal bandwidth is
achieved.
.Sh BUGS
More transmit and link failure algorithms should be supported.
A good candidate is Cisco's Etherchannel.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr ng_bridge 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
node type was implemented in
.Fx 4.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Archie Cobbs Aq archie@FreeBSD.org
