.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Baptiste Daroussin <bapt@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd April 9, 2026
.Dt NLSYSEVENT 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nlsysevent
.Nd Netlink-based kernel event notification module
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nlsysevent_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the module at runtime:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kldload nlsysevent
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
kernel module provides a
.Xr netlink 4
Generic Netlink interface for receiving kernel device events.
It hooks into the
.Xr devctl 4
notification system and re-publishes all kernel events as Generic Netlink
multicast messages under the
.Dv NETLINK_GENERIC
protocol family.
.Pp
This provides an alternative to reading events from
.Pa /dev/devctl
.Pq used by Xr devd 8 ,
with the advantage that multiple consumers can subscribe to events
simultaneously, and consumers can selectively subscribe to specific
event groups.
.Ss Generic Netlink Family
The module registers a Generic Netlink family named
.Dq Li nlsysevent .
The dynamically-assigned family identifier can be resolved using the
standard
.Dv CTRL_CMD_GETFAMILY
request as described in
.Xr genetlink 4 .
.Ss Commands
The following command is defined:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv NLSE_CMD_NEWEVENT
Sent when a kernel event occurs.
This message is never solicited by userland; it is only delivered to
sockets that have subscribed to one or more multicast groups.
.El
.Ss Attributes
Each
.Dv NLSE_CMD_NEWEVENT
message contains the following TLV attributes:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv NLSE_ATTR_SYSTEM
(string) The system name that generated the event
.Pq e.g., Dq Li ACPI , Dq Li IFNET , Dq Li USB .
.It Dv NLSE_ATTR_SUBSYSTEM
(string) The subsystem name within the system.
.It Dv NLSE_ATTR_TYPE
(string) The type of the event.
.It Dv NLSE_ATTR_DATA
(string) Optional extra data associated with the event.
This attribute may be absent if no extra data was provided.
.El
.Ss Multicast Groups
The module creates one multicast group per system name.
The following groups are pre-registered when the module is loaded:
.Pp
.Bl -column "HYPERV_NIC_VF" -offset indent -compact
.It Li ACPI
.It Li AEON
.It Li CAM
.It Li CARP
.It Li coretemp
.It Li DEVFS
.It Li device
.It Li ETHERNET
.It Li GEOM
.It Li HYPERV_NIC_VF
.It Li IFNET
.It Li INFINIBAND
.It Li KERNEL
.It Li nvme
.It Li PMU
.It Li RCTL
.It Li USB
.It Li VFS
.It Li VT
.It Li ZFS
.El
.Pp
Additional groups are created dynamically as new system names appear in
kernel events, up to a maximum of 64 groups.
.Pp
The group identifier for a given system name can be resolved via
.Dv CTRL_CMD_GETFAMILY
and then subscribed to using the
.Dv NETLINK_ADD_MEMBERSHIP
socket option.
.Sh EXAMPLES
The
.Xr genl 1
utility can be used to monitor events:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
genl monitor nlsysevent
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr genl 1 ,
.Xr snl 3 ,
.Xr devctl 4 ,
.Xr genetlink 4 ,
.Xr netlink 4 ,
.Xr devd 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module first appeared in
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
kernel module and this manual page were written by
.An Baptiste Daroussin Aq Mt bapt@FreeBSD.org .
