.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Noriaki MITSUNAGA. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Hideyuki KURASHINA. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 18, 2003
.Dt NSP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nsp
.Nd "Workbit Ninja SCSI-3 based PC-Card SCSI host adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device nsp"
.Cd "device scbus"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides access to the 
.Tn SCSI
bus connected to a PC-Card 
.Tn SCSI
host adapter based on a Ninja SCSI-3 controller by Workbit. 
The following adapters are known to work:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Alpha-Data AD-PCS201
.It
I-O DATA CBSC16
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr da 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr pccard 4 ,
.Xr sa 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4
.Sh BUGS
SMIT mode is only supported under OLDCARD now.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver has been developped for NetBSD/pc98 and ported for
.Fx .
It first appeared in
.Fx 3.4
with PAO3 and merged in
.Fx 4.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Naofumi HONDA .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An -nosplit
.An Noriaki MITSUNAGA Aq non@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Hideyuki KURASHINA Aq rushani@FreeBSD.org .
