.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 Chelsio Communications, Inc.
.\"
.Dd May 2, 2024
.Dt NVMF 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nvmf
.Nd "NVM Express over Fabrics host driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile the driver into the kernel,
place the following line in the
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device nvmf"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nvmf_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides the kernel component of an NVM Express over Fabrics
host.
The NVMeoF host is the client which provides local access to
namespaces exported by a remote controller.
.Pp
Associations between the local host and remote controllers are managed
using
.Xr nvmecontrol 8 .
New associations are created via the
.Cm connect
command and destroyed via the
.Cm disconnect
command.
If an association's connection is interrupted,
the
.Cm reconnect
command creates a new association to replace the interrupted association.
.Pp
Similar to
.Xr nvme 4 ,
.Nm
creates controller device nodes using the format
.Pa /dev/nvmeX
and namespace device nodes using the format
.Pa /dev/nvmeXnsY .
.Nm
also exports remote namespaces via the CAM
.Xr nda 4
peripheral driver.
Unlike
.Xr nvme 4 ,
.Nm
does not support the
.Xr nvd 4
disk driver.
.Pp
Associations require a supported transport such as
.Xr nvmf_tcp 4
for associations using TCP/IP.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr nda 4 ,
.Xr nvme 4 ,
.Xr nvmf_tcp 4 ,
.Xr nvmft 4 ,
.Xr nvmecontrol 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module first appeared in
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was developed by
.An John Baldwin Aq Mt jhb@FreeBSD.org
under sponsorship from Chelsio Communications, Inc.
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
only supports a single I/O queue pair per association.
