.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Netflix, Inc
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd June 20, 2021
.Dt OPTIONS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm options
.Nd Kernel configuration options
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd option ...
.Cd options ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This manual page documents the options to the
.Fx
kernel.
For general information about kernel config files, see
.Xr config 8
and
.Xr config 5 .
.Ss Keywords
.Bl -ohang
.It Sy option Ar var Op = Ar val
.It Sy options Ar var Op = Ar val
Specify an optional portion of the kernel be included.
An option may have an optional value, which is specified using the familiar
assignment notation above.
.El
.Pp
Other keywords can be found the
.Xr config 5
manual page.
.Ss Options
.Bl -ohang
.It Cd options MAXDSIZ Cd options MAXDSIZ Cd options DFLDSIZ
FreeBSD processes are subject to certain limits to their consumption
of system resources.
See getrlimit(2) for more details.
Each resource limit has two values, a "soft" limit and a "hard" limit.
The soft limits can be modified during normal system operation, but
the hard limits are set at boot time.
.It Cd options DFLTPHYS
The default safe raw I/O block device access size.
Reads and writes will be split into
.Va DFLTPHYS
byte chunks.
.It Cd options MAXPHYS
The largest raw I/O block device access size.
Reads and writes will be split into
.Va MAXPHYS
byte chunks for known good devices, subject to the device's limitation.
Many VM system parameters are sized based on this value, and setting it too
large can produce an unbootable kernel.
.El
