.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause-FreeBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Andriy Gapon <avg@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD: head/share/man/man4/cp2112.4 364144 2020-08-12 09:42:05Z avg $
.\"
.Dd November 6, 2021
.Dt PCF8591 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pcf8591
.Nd driver for the PCF8591 8-bit A/D and D/A converter
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pcf8591"
.Cd "device iicbus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pcf8591_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports reading four inputs and setting one output over I2C.
The hardware supports configuring the input lines as:
.Bl -bullet
.It
four single-ended inputs
.It
three differential inputs (one input line is shared between all three inputs)
.It
two single-ended inputs and one differential input
.It
two differential inputs.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver reports data via
.Xr sysctl 8
entries in the device's node in the
.Xr sysctl 8
tree:
.Bl -tag -width inputs.%d
.It Va inputs.%d
The input level of the corresponding input in steps between 0 and 255.
Absolute voltage depends on an actual reference voltage.
.El
.Pp
On an
.Xr FDT 4
based system the following properties must be set:
.Bl -tag -width "compatible"
.It Va compatible
Must be set to "nxp,pcf8591".
.It Va reg
The I2C address of
.Nm .
It should be in the range from 0x40 to 0x4f (7-bit).
.El
.Pp
The DTS part for a
.Nm
device usually looks like:
.Bd -literal
/ {

	...
	pcf8591adc {
		compatible = "nxp,pcf8591";
		reg = <0x48>;
	};
};
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fdt 4 ,
.Xr iicbus 4 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page was written by
.An Andriy Gapon Aq Mt avg@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver does not support changing the input configuration.
All input lines are configured as single-ended inputs.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver does not support setting the output.
It is always disabled (tri-state).
