.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Andriy Gapon <avg@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 6, 2021
.Dt PCF8574 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pcf8574
.Nd driver for the PCF8574 8-bit I2C IO expander
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device pcf8574"
.Cd "device gpio"
.Cd "device iicbus"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pcf8574_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides
.Xr gpiobus 4
control over 8 GPIO pins.
The pins are quasi-bidirectional.
Only low output can be actively driven.
High output is equivalent to input.
.Pp
On an
.Xr FDT 4
based system the following properties must be set:
.Bl -tag -width "compatible"
.It Va compatible
Must be set to "nxp,pcf8574".
.It Va reg
The I2C address of
.Nm .
.El
.Pp
The DTS part for a
.Nm
device usually looks like:
.Bd -literal
/ {

	...
	pcf8574@27 {
		compatible = "nxp,pcf8574";
		reg = <0x27>;
	};
};
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr fdt 4 ,
.Xr gpiobus 4 ,
.Xr iicbus 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver and this manual page was written by
.An Andriy Gapon Aq Mt avg@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver does not support the input change interrupt
that the hardware provides.
