.\" Copyright (c) 1983, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)pty.4	8.2 (Berkeley) 11/30/93
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 30, 1993
.Dt PTY 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pty
.Nd pseudo terminal driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device pty"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for a device-pair termed a
.Em pseudo terminal .
A pseudo terminal is a pair of character devices, a
.Em master
device and a
.Em slave
device.
The slave device provides to a process an interface identical
to that described in
.Xr tty 4 .
However, whereas all other devices which provide the
interface described in
.Xr tty 4
have a hardware device of some sort behind them, the slave
device has, instead, another process manipulating
it through the master half of the pseudo terminal.
That is, anything written on the master device is
given to the slave device as input and anything written
on the slave device is presented as input on the master
device.
.Pp
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
calls apply only to pseudo terminals:
.Bl -tag -width TIOCREMOTE
.It Dv TIOCSTOP
Stops output to a terminal (e.g.\& like typing
.Ql ^S ) .
Takes
no parameter.
.It Dv TIOCSTART
Restarts output (stopped by
.Dv TIOCSTOP
or by typing
.Ql ^S ) .
Takes no parameter.
.It Dv TIOCPKT
Enable/disable
.Em packet
mode.
Packet mode is enabled by specifying (by reference)
a nonzero parameter and disabled by specifying (by reference)
a zero parameter.
When applied to the master side of a pseudo terminal, each subsequent
.Xr read 2
from the terminal will return data written on the slave part of
the pseudo terminal preceded by a zero byte (symbolically
defined as
.Dv TIOCPKT_DATA ) ,
or a single byte reflecting control
status information.
In the latter case, the byte is an inclusive-or
of zero or more of the bits:
.Bl -tag -width TIOCPKT_FLUSHWRITE
.It Dv TIOCPKT_FLUSHREAD
whenever the read queue for the terminal is flushed.
.It Dv TIOCPKT_FLUSHWRITE
whenever the write queue for the terminal is flushed.
.It Dv TIOCPKT_STOP
whenever output to the terminal is stopped a la
.Ql ^S .
.It Dv TIOCPKT_START
whenever output to the terminal is restarted.
.It Dv TIOCPKT_DOSTOP
whenever
.Em t_stopc
is
.Ql ^S
and
.Em t_startc
is
.Ql ^Q .
.It Dv TIOCPKT_NOSTOP
whenever the start and stop characters are not
.Ql ^S/^Q .
.Pp
While this mode is in use, the presence of control status information
to be read from the master side may be detected by a
.Xr select 2
for exceptional conditions.
.Pp
This mode is used by
.Xr rlogin 1
and
.Xr rlogind 8
to implement a remote-echoed, locally
.Ql ^S/^Q
flow-controlled
remote login with proper back-flushing of output; it can be
used by other similar programs.
.El
.It Dv TIOCUCNTL
Enable/disable a mode that allows a small number of simple user
.Xr ioctl 2
commands to be passed through the pseudo-terminal,
using a protocol similar to that of
.Dv TIOCPKT .
The
.Dv TIOCUCNTL
and
.Dv TIOCPKT
modes are mutually exclusive.
This mode is enabled from the master side of a pseudo terminal
by specifying (by reference)
a nonzero parameter and disabled by specifying (by reference)
a zero parameter.
Each subsequent
.Xr read 2
from the master side will return data written on the slave part of
the pseudo terminal preceded by a zero byte,
or a single byte reflecting a user control operation on the slave side.
A user control command consists of a special
.Xr ioctl 2
operation with no data; the command is given as
.Dv UIOCCMD Ns (n) ,
where
.Ar n
is a number in the range 1-255.
The operation value
.Ar n
will be received as a single byte on the next
.Xr read 2
from the master side.
The
.Xr ioctl 2
.Dv UIOCCMD Ns (0)
is a no-op that may be used to probe for
the existence of this facility.
As with
.Dv TIOCPKT
mode, command operations may be detected with a
.Xr select 2
for exceptional conditions.
.El
.Pp
There is currently two
.Nm
systems available: the original
.Bx Nm ,
and a
SysVR4 pts-like implementation.
It is possible to switch between the two implementations by setting the
.Va kern.pts.enable
sysctl.
Setting it to 0 will use the
.Bx Nm ,
to non-zero the pts implementation.
It defaults to 0.
It is possible to set the maximum number of ptys
which can be allocated at the same time with the
.Va kern.pts.max
sysctl.
It defaults to 1000.
It is not recommended to use more than 1000 pseudo-terminals, as all software
which use
.Xr utmp 5
will not be able to handle pseudo-terminals with number superior to 999.
.Pp
The pts implementation also supports the
.Dv TIOCGPTN
.Xr ioctl 2
call, which takes a pointer to an
.Vt "unsigned int"
as a parameter and provides the
number of the pty.
.Sh FILES
The files used by the
.Bx
pseudo terminals implementation are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/tty[p-sP-S][0-9a-v]" -compact
.It Pa /dev/pty[p-sP-S][0-9a-v]
master pseudo terminals
.It Pa /dev/tty[p-sP-S][0-9a-v]
slave pseudo terminals
.El
.Pp
The files used by the pts implementation are:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/pts/[num]" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ptmx
control device, returns a file descriptor to a new master pseudo terminal
when opened.
.It Pa /dev/pty[num]
master pseudo terminals
.It Pa /dev/pts/[num]
slave pseudo terminals
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
None.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
