.\" Copyright (c) 2002 John Hay.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 13, 2025
.Dt PUC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm puc
.Nd PCI
.Dq Universal
Communications driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device pci"
.Cd "device puc"
.Cd "device uart"
.Cd "device ppc"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver acts as a shim to connect
PCI multi-port serial and parallel adapters to the
.Xr uart 4
and
.Xr ppc 4
driver.
.Pp
The list of supported devices is in
.Pa sys/dev/puc/pucdata.c .
Support for new cards should be added there.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following
PCI multi-port serial and parallel adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Actiontech 56K PCI
.It
Avlab Technology, PCI IO 2S and PCI IO 4S
.It
Comtrol RocketPort 550
.It
Decision Computers PCCOM 4-port serial and dual port RS232/422/485
.It
Dolphin Peripherals 4025/4035/4036
.It
IC Book Labs Dreadnought 16x Lite and Pro
.It
Lava Computers 2SP-PCI/DSerial-PCI/Quattro-PCI/Octopus-550
.It
Middle Digital, Weasle serial adapter
.It
Moxa Industio CP-114, Smartio C104H-PCI and C168H/PCI
.It
NEC PK-UG-X001 and PK-UG-X008
.It
Netmos NM9835 PCI-2S-550
.It
Oxford Semiconductor OX16PCI954 PCI UART
.It
Syba Tech SD-LAB PCI-4S2P-550-ECP
.It
SIIG Cyber I/O PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850
.It
SIIG Cyber 2P1S PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850
.It
SIIG Cyber 2S1P PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850
.It
SIIG Cyber 4S PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850
.It
SIIG Cyber Serial (Single and Dual) PCI 16C550/16C650/16C850
.It
Syba Tech Ltd PCI-4S2P-550-ECP
.It
Titan PCI-200H and PCI-800H
.It
US Robotics (3Com) 3CP5609 modem
.It
VScom PCI-400 and PCI-800
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ppc 4 ,
.Xr uart 4
.Sh HISTORY
This driver took the idea from the
.Nx
.Nm
driver.
