.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2020 Rubicon Communications, LLC (Netgate)
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 21, 2022
.Dt QAT_C2XXX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm qat_c2xxx
.Nd Intel QuickAssist Technology (QAT) driver for Atom C2000 chipsets
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device crypto"
.Cd "device cryptodev"
.Cd "device qat"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following lines in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
qat_c2xxx_load="YES"
qat_c2xxxfw_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver implements
.Xr crypto 4
support for some of the cryptographic acceleration functions of the Intel
QuickAssist (QAT) device found on Atom C2000 devices.
QAT devices are enumerated through PCIe and are thus visible in
.Xr pciconf 8
output.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver can accelerate AES in CBC, CTR, and GCM modes,
and can perform authenticated encryption combining the CBC, and CTR modes
with SHA1-HMAC and SHA2-HMAC.
The
.Nm
driver can also compute SHA1 and SHA2 digests.
The implementation of AES-GCM has a firmware-imposed constraint that the length
of any additional authenticated data (AAD) must not exceed 240 bytes.
The driver thus rejects
.Xr crypto 9
requests that do not satisfy this constraint.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypto 4 ,
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr pci 4 ,
.Xr qat 4 ,
.Xr random 4 ,
.Xr crypto 7 ,
.Xr crypto 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 13.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written for
.Nx
by
.An Hikaru Abe Aq Mt hikaru@iij.ad.jp .
.An Mark Johnston Aq Mt markj@FreeBSD.org
ported the driver to
.Fx .
.Sh BUGS
Some Atom C2000 QAT devices have two acceleration engines instead of one.
The
.Nm
driver currently misbehaves when both are enabled and thus does not enable
the second acceleration engine if one is present.
