.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 21, 2004
.Dt RC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm rc
.Nd RISCom/8 multiport card
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device isa
.Cd device rc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the
.Tn SDL
Communications
.Tn Riscom/8
boards.
The
.Tn RISCom/8
is an eight port
.Tn ISA
.Tn RS-232C
communications multiplexor with a built in
.Tn RISC
processor.
It uses a block of sixteen
.Tn I/O
ports in the range 0x200 to 0x3f0 selectable by on-board
switches or jumpers.
The block must be aligned on a sixteen port boundary.
The jumper-selectable hardware interrupt level may be set to
be detected during system
initialization using settings found in the
.Pa /boot/device.hints
file.
.Pp
This driver is mostly based on Cirrus Logic CL-CD180 driver.
.Sh ERRORS
The following driver specific error messages
may be reported:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EBUSY
May be returned if the device was busy when a
request to access its resources was made by
.Nm
and was denied.
.It Bq Er ENOMEM
May be returned if the
.Nm
driver was unable to obtain the
.Tn IOBASE
addresses.
.It Bq Er ENXIO
May be returned if the device cannot obtain a valid
.Tn I/O
port through
.Fn isa_get_port .
This error may also be returned if the
.Fn isa_get_irq
function cannot obtain a valid
.Tn IRQ .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 1 ,
.Xr ttyname 3 ,
.Xr sio 4 ,
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr device.hints 5 ,
.Xr comcontrol 8 ,
.Xr getty 8 ,
.Xr mutex 9 ,
.Xr splx 9
.Pp
.Pa http://www.sdlcomm.com
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 2.0.5 .
This manual page first appeared in
.Fx 5.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Nm
driver code still uses the
.Xr spl 9
functions.
These should be replaced by
.Xr mutex 9
functions.
.Pp
The various
.Fn ttyld_*
functions should be documented.
