.\\"-
.\\" Copyright (c) 2003	Sam Leffler, Errno Consulting
.\\" All rights reserved.
.\\"
.\\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\\" are met:
.\\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\\"
.\\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\\"
.\\" $FreeBSD$
.\\"/
.Dd May 30, 2002
.Dt SAFE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm safe
.Nd SafeNet crypto accelerator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm device safe
.sp
.Cd sysctl hw.safe.debug
.Cd sysctl hw.safe.rnginterval
.Cd sysctl hw.safe.rngbufsize
.Cd sysctl hw.safe.rngmaxalarm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports cards containing any of the following chips:
.Bl -tag -width "SafeNet 1141" -offset indent
.It SafeNet 1141
The original chipset.  Supports DES, Triple-DES, AES, MD5, and SHA-1
symmetric crypto operations, RNG, public key operations, and full IPsec
packet processing.
.It SafeNet 1741
A faster version of the 1141.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver registers itself to accelerate DES, Triple-DES, AES, MD5-HMAC,
SHA1-HMAC, and NULL operations for
.Xr ipsec 4
and
.Xr crypto 4 .
.Pp
On all models, the driver registers itself to provide random data to the
.Xr random 4
subsystem.
Periodically the driver will poll the hardware RNG and retrieve
data to for use by the system.
If the driver detects that the hardware RNG is resonating with any local
signal it will reset the oscillators that generate random data.
Three sysctl settings control this procedure:
.Li hw.safe.rnginterval
specifies the time, in seconds, between polling operations,
.Li hw.safe.rngbufsize
specifies the number of 32-bit words to retrieve on each poll,
and
.Li hw.safe.rngmaxalarm
specifies the threshold for reseting the oscillators.
.Pp
When the driver is compiled with
.Dv SAFE_DEBUG
defined, two sysctl variables are provided for debugging purposes:
.Li hw.safe.debug
can be set to a non-zero value to enable debugging messages to be sent
to the console for each cryptographic operation.
.Li hw.safe.dump
is a write-only variable that can be used to force driver state to be sent
to the console.
Set this variable to
.Li ring
to dump the current state of the descriptor ring,
to
.Li dma
to dump the hardware DMA registers,
or
to
.Li int
to dump the hardware interrupt registers.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr crypt 3 ,
.Xr crypto 4 ,
.Xr intro 4 ,
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr random 4 ,
.Xr crypto 9
.Sh BUGS
Public key support is not implemented.
