.\" Copyright (c) 1998-2002 Katsushi Kobayashi and Hidetoshi Shimokawa
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the acknowledgement as bellow:
.\"
.\"      This product includes software developed by K. Kobayashi
.\"
.\" 4. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT,
.\" INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT,
.\" STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
.\" ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 20, 2002
.Dt SBP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sbp
.Nd Serial Bus Protocol 2 (SBP-2) Mass Storage Devices driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device sbp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for SBP-2 devices that attach to the firewire
(IEEE 1394)
port.
Verified are:
.Pp
.Bl -item -compact
.It
Apple Macintosh G4 (target mode)
.It
Apple iPod
.El
.Pp
.Xr firewire 4
and
.Xr fwohci 4
must be configured in the kernel as well.
Last but not least, support for
SCSI drives,
.Xr da 4 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device sbp
device scbus
device da
device pass
.Ed
.Pp
Add the
.Nm
driver to the kernel.
.Pp
.Dl "camcontrol rescan 0"
.Pp
Rescan a SCSI drive that was added after boot.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Katsushi Kobayashi
and
.An Hidetoshi Shimokawa .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Katsushi Kobayashi .
