.\" Written by Denis I. Timofeev, 2003.
.\" 
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 11, 2003
.Dt SBSH 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm sbsh
.Nd "Granch SBNI16 SHDSL modem device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device sbsh"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for an internal PCI modem SBNI16-SHDSL. A device
is introduced to OS as common ethernet-like netcard which must be
configured with
.Xr ifconfig 8
(all standard network interface parameters could be set). Modem-specific
parameters (master/slave mode, line rate etc.) must be set with the
sb16config utility before interface activation.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "sbsh%d: couldn't map memory"
.It "sbsh%d: couldn't map interrupt"
.It "sbsh%d: couldn't set up irq"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "sbsh%d: unable to load firmware"
A fatal error has occurred while sb16config running.
.It "sbsh%d: firmware wasn't loaded"
ifconfig...up has failed because device hadn't been configured with
sb16config.
.It "sbsh%d: transmit timeout"
.It "sbsh%d: interrupt posted but not delivered"
Probably, a hardware error or incompatibility.
.It "sbsh%d: unable to get mbuf"
.It "sbsh%d: unable to get mbuf cluster"
The driver failed to allocate a memory buffer.
.El
.Sh FILES
The sources for the driver reside in:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -compact
.It Pa /sys/dev/sbsh/if_sbsh.c
.It Pa /sys/dev/sbsh/if_sbshreg.h
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr /usr/ports/sysutils/sb16config
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.9 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Denis I. Timofeev Aq timofeev@granch.ru .
