.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Joel Dahl
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 2, 2005
.Dt SND_VIA8233 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm snd_via8233
.Nd "VIA Technologies VT8233 bridge device driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device sound"
.Cd "device snd_via8233"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
bridge driver allows the generic audio driver,
.Xr sound 4 ,
to attach to the VIA VT8233 audio devices.
These audio chipsets are integrated in the southbridge on many VIA based
motherboards.
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following audio chipsets:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
VIA VT8233
.It
VIA VT8233A
.It
VIA VT8233C
.It
VIA VT8235
.It
VIA VT8237
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sound 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.7 .
.Sh BUGS
.Nm
does not support S/PDIF.
There is partial support in the code, so implementing it should be fairly
easy if the right hardware is available.
