.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Scott Long
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 14, 2001
.Dt MAESTRO3 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm maestro3
.Nd FreeBSD audio sub-driver for ESS Maestro3/Allegro-1 hardware
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Li "kldload snd_maestro3"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the ESS Maestro3 and Allegro-1 sound chips
under the PCM framework.
These chips are mostly found in laptop computers and feature an AC97 mixer,
a multi-channel sample rate converter that can mix up to four digital audio
streams in hardware, recording support, and external volume control buttons.
.Pp
The firmware for the sound processor is licensed under the GNU Public
License, and thus this driver is not included in the default
.Pa GENERIC
kernel, nor is it compiled into the kernel when
.Cd "device pcm"
is specified in the kernel config file.
A convenient way to automatically load the driver is to add the line
.Pp
.Dl snd_maestro3_load="YES"
.Pp
to the file
.Pa /boot/loader.conf .
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The hardware volume control buttons can be connected to two different pin
sets on the chip, depending on the manufacturer.
The driver has no way of determining this configuration, so a hint may be
used to override the default guess.
Add the line
.Dq Li hint.pcm.0.hwvol_config="0"
to the file
.Pa /boot/device.hints
to override the default setting.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pcm 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 4.3 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Scott Long Aq scottl@FreeBSD.org
.An Darrel Anderson Aq anderson@cs.duke.edu
