.\"	$Id: su.4,v 1.10 1997/02/22 13:24:44 peter Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1997 Brian Somers <brian@Awfulhak.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd December 29, 1997
.Dt SSC 4
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ssc
.Nd The `super scsi' driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "pseudo-device ssc"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides an access point into the SCSI driver code that can
be used when no SCSI devices have previously been detected.  This
is useful for systems that contain only external SCSI devices that
may be powered off at boot time.
.Pp
The
.Sq scsi user ,
or
.Xr su 4
pseudo-device is used by
.Nm ssc ,
and therefore must also be configured.
.Sh KERNEL CONFIGURATION
There are no configuration parameters for the ssc pseudo-device.
.Pp
.Sh IOCTLS
The 
.Nm
driver has a single
.Dv SCIOCADDR
ioctl of it's own.  This ioctl must be used after opening
.Pa /dev/ssc
and before issuing any other ioctl calls:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
.Fd #include <sys/scsiio.h>

.Ft int
.Fn ioctl "int fd" "SCIOCADDR" "struct scsi_addr *data"
.Ed
.Pp
.Ar Fd
refers to the descriptor returned by
.Xr open 2 ,
and
.Ar data
must have the
.Ar scbus ,
.Ar target
and
.Ar lun
fields set as required.  This ioctl may be used at will to change the
device to which subsequent ioctls affect.
.Pp
All other ioctls are passed directly to the
.Xr su 4
pseudo-device driver, using the Bus, Target and Lun that were set
with the last
.Dv SCIOCADDR
ioctl call.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/ssc -compact
.It Pa /dev/ssc
The device file used to access the
.Sq super scsi
driver.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
If any ioctl is attempted before issuing a
.Dv SCIOCADDR
ioctl,
.Dv ENXIO
is returned.  Otherwise, the ioctl is passed directly to the
.Xr su 4
driver.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr open 2 ,
.Xr scsi 8 ,
.Xr su 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver originally appeared in FreeBSD 2.0.5.
