.\"     $KAME: stf.4,v 1.35 2001/05/02 06:24:49 itojun Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 WIDE Project.
.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Hiroki Sato <hrs@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the project nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE PROJECT AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE PROJECT OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 23, 2010
.Dt STF 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm stf
.Nd
.Tn 6to4
tunnel interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device stf"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
interface supports IPv6 in IPv4 encapsulation by
tunneling IPv6 traffic over IPv4, as specified in
.Li RFC3056 Pq 6to4
and
.Li RFC5569 Pq 6rd .
.Pp
Each
.Nm
interface is created at runtime using interface cloning.
This is
most easily done with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Cm create
command or using the
.Va cloned_interfaces
variable in
.Xr rc.conf 5 .
.Pp
Due to the way 6to4 protocol is specified,
.Nm
interface requires certain configuration to work properly.  Two
different protocols defined in RFC3056 and RFC5569 are basically the
same as each other except for address handling, so
.Nm
decides its behavior based on the configured IPv6 addresses as
explained in the following.
The
.Nm
interface can be configured with multiple IPv6 addresses including
both 6to4 and 6rd.
.Sh RFC3056 (a.k.a. 6to4)
Single
.Pq no more than 1 valid 6to4 address needs to be configured to the interface.
.Dq a valid 6to4 address
is an address which has the following properties.  For ordinary nodes
in 6to4 site, you do not need
.Nm
interface; it is necessary only for site border router
(called
.Dq 6to4 router
in the specification).
.Pp
If any of the following properties are not satisfied,
.Nm
raises runtime error on packet transmission.
Read the specification for more details.
.Bl -bullet
.It
matches
.Li 2002:xxyy:zzuu::/48
where
.Li xxyy:zzuu
is a hexadecimal notation of an IPv4 address for the node.
IPv4 address can be taken from any of interfaces your node has.
Since the specification forbids the use of IPv4 private address,
the address needs to be a global IPv4 address.
.It
Subnet identifier portion
(48th to 63rd bit)
and interface identifier portion
(lower 64 bits)
are properly filled to avoid address collisions.
.El
.Pp
If you would like the node to behave as a relay router,
the prefix length for the IPv6 interface address needs to be 16 so that
the node would consider any 6to4 destination as
.Dq on-link .
If you would like to restrict 6to4 peers to be inside certain IPv4 prefix,
you may want to configure IPv6 prefix length as
.Dq 16 + IPv4 prefix length .
.Nm
interface will check the IPv4 source address on packets,
if the IPv6 prefix length is larger than 16.
.Sh RFC5569 (a.k.a. 6rd)
The
.Nm
interface works in the 6rd mode when one or more IPv6 addresses that
consists of an IPv6 prefix and 32-bit IPv4 part with a prefix length
equal to or shorter than 64.  In 6rd protocol, an IPv6 address
.Li 2001:db8:c000:205::1/32
means the following, for example:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The 6rd relay prefix is
.Li 2001:db8::/32 .
.It
The 6rd router's IPv4 address is
.Li 192.0.2.5 .
.El
.Pp
As you can see the IPv4 address is embedded in the IPv6 address just
after the prefix.  While you can choose an IPv6 prefix length other
than 32, it must be from 0 to 32.
.Pp
Assuming this address is configured on the
.Nm
interface, it does the following:
.Bl -bullet
.It
An incoming IPv6 packet on
.Nm
will be encapsuled in an IPv4 packet with the source address
.Li 192.0.2.5
and then the IPv4 packet is delivered based on the IPv4 routing table.
The IPv4 destination address is calculated from the destination
address of the original IPv6 packet in the same way as the source.
.It
An incoming IPv4 packet which encapsules an IPv6 packet whose
destination address matches a 6rd prefix with embedded IPv4 address
configured on the
.Nm
interface, the IPv6 packet will be decapsulated and delivered based on
the IPv6 routing table.  Note that
.Nm
interface normally has a route which covers whole range of a 6rd relay
prefix, the delivered IPv6 packet can return to
.Nm
if there is no more specific route.  In that case, the returned packet
will be discarded silently.
.El
.\" XXX: example configuration will be added
.\" .Pp
.\" By using this interface, you can configure a 6rd domain.  For simplicity,
.\" we assume the following here:
.\" .Bl -bullet
.\" .It
.\" A 6rd Customer, who has an IPv6/IPv4 LAN and an IPv4-only access
.\" toward network of his Internet Service Provider.  The Customer has
.\" a router called
.\" .Dq CE Pq Customer Edge
.\" Router, which can communicate between his LAN and the ISP over IPv4
.\" and encapsulate  
.\" his networks.
.\" .It
.\" A 6rd Provider, who provides IPv6 Internet reachability by using 6rd
.\" protocol.  The Provider offers access to a router called
.\" .Dq PE Pq Provider Edge
.\" Router, which can communicate with 
.\" .El
.\" .Pp
.\" A 6rd customer
.\" needs to configure
.\" .Nm
.\" on his CE (Customer Edge) router.
.Sh Other Functionality of the Interface
.Pp
.Nm
can be configured to be ECN friendly.
This can be configured by
.Dv IFF_LINK1 .
See
.Xr gif 4
for details.
.Pp
Please note that 6to4 specification is written as
.Dq accept tunnelled packet from everyone
tunnelling device.
By enabling
.Nm
device, you are making it much easier for malicious parties to inject
fabricated IPv6 packet to your node.
Also, malicious party can inject an IPv6 packet with fabricated source address
to make your node generate improper tunnelled packet.
Administrators must take caution when enabling the interface.
To prevent possible attacks,
.Nm
interface filters out the following packets.
Note that the checks are no way complete:
.Bl -bullet
.It
Packets with IPv4 unspecified address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 0.0.0.0/8
.It
Packets with loopback address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 127.0.0.0/8
.It
Packets with IPv4 multicast address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 224.0.0.0/4
.It
Packets with limited broadcast address as outer IPv4 source/destination
.Pq Li 255.0.0.0/8
.It
Packets with subnet broadcast address as outer IPv4 source/destination.
The check is made against subnet broadcast addresses for
all of the directly connected subnets.
.It
Packets that does not pass ingress filtering.
Outer IPv4 source address must meet the IPv4 topology on the routing table.
Ingress filter can be turned off by
.Dv IFF_LINK2
bit.
.It
The same set of rules are applied against the IPv4 address embedded into
inner IPv6 address, if the IPv6 address matches 6to4 prefix.
.El
.Pp
In addition to them, packets with private address as outer IPv4
source/destination
.Pq Li 10.0.0.0/8 , 172.16.0.0/12 , 192.168.0.0/16
are filtered out only in the 6to4 mode.
.Pp
It is recommended to filter/audit
incoming IPv4 packet with IP protocol number 41, as necessary.
It is also recommended to filter/audit encapsulated IPv6 packets as well.
You may also want to run normal ingress filter against inner IPv6 address
to avoid spoofing.
.Pp
By setting the
.Dv IFF_LINK0
flag on the
.Nm
interface, it is possible to disable the input path,
making the direct attacks from the outside impossible.
Note, however, there are other security risks exist.
If you wish to use the configuration,
you must not advertise your 6to4 address to others.
.\"
.Sh EXAMPLES
Note that
.Li 8504:0506
is equal to
.Li 133.4.5.6 ,
written in hexadecimals.
.Bd -literal
# ifconfig ne0 inet 133.4.5.6 netmask 0xffffff00
# ifconfig stf0 inet6 2002:8504:0506:0000:a00:5aff:fe38:6f86 \\
	prefixlen 16 alias
.Ed
.Pp
The following configuration accepts packets from IPv4 source
.Li 9.1.0.0/16
only.
It emits 6to4 packet only for IPv6 destination 2002:0901::/32
(IPv4 destination will match
.Li 9.1.0.0/16 ) .
.Bd -literal
# ifconfig ne0 inet 9.1.2.3 netmask 0xffff0000
# ifconfig stf0 inet6 2002:0901:0203:0000:a00:5aff:fe38:6f86 \\
	prefixlen 32 alias
.Ed
.Pp
The following configuration uses the
.Nm
interface as an output-only device.
You need to have alternative IPv6 connectivity
(other than 6to4)
to use this configuration.
For outbound traffic, you can reach other 6to4 networks efficiently via
.Nm stf .
For inbound traffic, you will not receive any 6to4-tunneled packets
(less security drawbacks).
Be careful not to advertise your 6to4 prefix to others
.Pq Li 2002:8504:0506::/48 ,
and not to use your 6to4 prefix as a source.
.Bd -literal
# ifconfig ne0 inet 133.4.5.6 netmask 0xffffff00
# ifconfig stf0 inet6 2002:8504:0506:0000:a00:5aff:fe38:6f86 \\
	prefixlen 16 alias deprecated link0
# route add -inet6 2002:: -prefixlen 16 ::1
# route change -inet6 2002:: -prefixlen 16 ::1 -ifp stf0
.Ed
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gif 4 ,
.Xr inet 4 ,
.Xr inet6 4
.Pp
.Pa http://www.6bone.net/6bone_6to4.html
.Rs
.%A Brian Carpenter
.%A Keith Moore
.%T "Connection of IPv6 Domains via IPv4 Clouds"
.%D February 2001
.%R RFC
.%N 3056
.Re
.Rs
.%A Jun-ichiro itojun Hagino
.%T "Possible abuse against IPv6 transition technologies"
.%D July 2000
.%N draft-itojun-ipv6-transition-abuse-01.txt
.%O work in progress
.Re
.\"
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device first appeared in WIDE/KAME IPv6 stack.
.\"
.Sh BUGS
No more than one
.Nm
interface is allowed for a node,
and no more than one IPv6 interface address is allowed for an
.Nm
interface.
It is to avoid source address selection conflicts
between IPv6 layer and IPv4 layer,
and to cope with ingress filtering rule on the other side.
This is a feature to make
.Nm
work right for all occasions.
