.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2020, Gordon Bergling
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 24, 2020
.Dt TCP_BBR 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tcp_bbr
.Nd TCP Bottleneck Bandwidth and Round-Trip Time Algorithm
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To use this TCP stack you have to place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options TCPHPTS"
.Ed
.Pp
To load the driver as a module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tcp_bbr_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
To enable the TCP stack you must place the following line in the
.Xr sysctl.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
net.inet.tcp.functions_default=bbr
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Bottleneck bandwidth and round-trip time (BBR) is a congestion control algorithm which
seeks high throughput with a small queue by probing BW and RTT.
It is a round-up redesign of congestion control, which is not loss-based, delay-based,
ECN-based or AIMD-based.
.Pp
The core design of BBR is about creating a model graph of the network path by
estimating the maximum BW and minimum RTT on each ACK.
.Sh MIB Variables
The algorithm exposes the following scopes in the
.Va net.inet.tcp.bbr
branch of the
.Xr sysctl 3
MIB:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va exp_backoff_scale"
.It Va cwnd
Cwnd controls, for example "target cwnd rtt measurment" and "BBR initial window".
.It Va measure
Measurement controls.
.It Va pacing
Connection pacing controls.
.It Va policer
Policer controls, for example "false detection threshold" and "loss threshold".
.It Va probertt
Probe RTT controls.
.It Va startup
Startup controls.
.It Va states
State controls.
.It Va timeout
Time out controls.
.El
.Pp
Besides the variables within the above scopes the following
variables are also exposed in the
.Va net.inet.tcp.bbr
branch:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va exp_backoff_scale"
.It Va clrlost
Clear lost counters.
.It Va software_pacing
Total number of software paced flows.
.It Va hdwr_pacing
Total number of hardware paced flows.
.It Va enob_no_hdwr_pacing
Total number of enobufs for non-hardware paced flows.
.It Va enob_hdwr_pacing
Total number of enobufs for hardware paced flows.
.It Va rtt_tlp_thresh
What divisor for TLP rtt/retran will be added (1=rtt, 2=1/2 rtt etc).
.It Va reorder_fade
Does reorder detection fade, if so how many ms (0 means never).
.It Va reorder_thresh
What factor for rack will be added when seeing reordering (shift right).
.It Va bb_verbose
Should BBR black box logging be verbose.
.It Va sblklimit
When do we start ignoring small sack blocks.
.It Va resend_use_tso
Can resends use TSO?
.It Va data_after_close
Do we hold off sending a RST until all pending data is ack'd.
.It Va kill_paceout
When we hit this many errors in a row, kill the session?
.It Va error_paceout
When we hit an error what is the min to pace out in usec's?
.It Va cheat_rxt
Do we burst 1ms between sends on retransmissions (like rack)?
.It Va minrto
Minimum RTO in ms.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cc_chd 4 ,
.Xr cc_cubic 4 ,
.Xr cc_hd 4 ,
.Xr cc_htcp 4 ,
.Xr cc_newreno 4 ,
.Xr cc_vegas 4 ,
.Xr h_ertt 4 ,
.Xr mod_cc 4 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr mod_cc 9
.Rs
.%A "Neal Cardwell"
.%A "Yuchung Cheng"
.%A "Stephen Gunn"
.%A "Soheil Hassas Yeganeh"
.%A "Van Jacobson"
.%T "BBR: Congestion-Based Congestion Control"
.%J "ACM Queue, Vol. 14"
.%D "September / October 2016"
.Re
.Rs
.%A "Dominik Scholz"
.%A "Benedikt Jaeger"
.%A "Lukas Schwaighofer"
.%A "Daniel Raumer"
.%A "Fabien Geyer"
.%A "Georg Carle"
.%T "Towards a Deeper Understanding of TCP BBR Congestion Control"
.%J "IFIP Networking 2018"
.%D "May 2018"
.%U "http://www.net.in.tum.de/fileadmin/bibtex/publications/papers/IFIP-Networking-2018-TCP-BBR.pdf"
.Re
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
congestion control module first appeared in
.Fx 13.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
congestion control module was written by
.An Randall Stewart Aq Mt rrs@FreeBSD.org
and sponsored by Netflix, Inc.
This manual page was written by
.An Gordon Bergling Aq Mt gbe@FreeBSD.org .
