.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd March 14, 2026
.Dt TCPSTATS 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tcpstats
.Nd TCP connection statistics character device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To load the driver as a module at run-time, run the following command as root:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kldload tcpstats
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a module at boot time, add the following
line into the
.Xr loader.conf 5
file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
tcpstats_load="YES"
.Ed
.Pp
To compile the driver into the kernel, add the following to the kernel
configuration file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device tcpstats
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
kernel module creates a read-only character device
.Pa /dev/tcpstats
that, when read, iterates every TCP connection in the kernel in a single
pass and streams fixed-size 320-byte records to userspace via
.Xr uiomove 9 .
.Pp
Each record is a
.Vt struct tcp_stats_record
containing comprehensive per-connection metrics including TCP state,
addresses, ports, congestion control parameters, RTT, sequence numbers,
retransmit counters, ECN state, timer values, and buffer utilization.
.Pp
A second device
.Pa /dev/tcpstats-full
is also created, which populates all record fields by default (equivalent
to setting
.Va format=full ) .
.Pp
On systems with a large number of TCP connections, reading without a
filter requires iterating every socket.
Using the filtering interface described below under
.Sx Filtering
is strongly recommended to reduce the amount of data collected and
minimize impact on the system.
.Ss Security Model
To minimize the potential impact on the system, multiple layers of
security and resource controls are enforced:
.Bl -enum
.It
File permissions:
.Pa /dev/tcpstats
is created with mode 0440, owned by root:network.
.It
Write rejection: opening the device for writing returns
.Er EPERM .
.It
Credential visibility: each connection is checked with
.Fn cr_canseeinpcb
using the opener's credentials.
Only connections visible to the reader are emitted.
.It
Concurrent FD limit: controlled by
.Va dev.tcpstats.max_open_fds
(default 16).
Returns
.Er EMFILE
when exceeded.
.It
Concurrent reader limit: controlled by
.Va dev.tcpstats.max_concurrent_readers
(default 32).
Returns
.Er EBUSY
when exceeded.
.El
.Ss Record Format
Each record is exactly 320 bytes, packed and 8-byte aligned.
The record layout is defined by
.Vt struct tcp_stats_record
in
.In netinet/tcp_statsdev.h .
The record is versioned
.Pq Va tsr_version
and includes 52 bytes of spare space for future expansion without
breaking the ABI.
.Pp
Key field groups:
.Bl -tag -width "Congestion" -compact
.It Identity
Address family, local/remote addresses and ports, socket metadata.
.It State
TCP state value, TCP flags, window scale, options (SACK, timestamps).
.It RTT
Smoothed RTT, RTT variance, retransmission timeout, minimum RTT.
.It Congestion
Congestion window, slow-start threshold, send/receive windows, MSS.
.It Names
Congestion control algorithm name, TCP stack name.
.It Sequences
Send next/unack/max, receive next/advertised.
.It Counters
Retransmit packets, out-of-order packets, zero-window probes, dupacks.
.It ECN
ECN negotiation state, delivered/received CE marks, DSACK, TLP.
.It Timers
Remaining time for retransmit, persist, keepalive, 2MSL, delayed ACK
timers; time since last receive.
.It Buffers
Send/receive buffer current usage and high-water marks.
.El
.Ss Filtering
Filters can be applied via the
.Dv TCPSTATS_SET_FILTER
.Xr ioctl 2
or via sysctl-created named profiles.
All filter conditions are ANDed together.
.Pp
Filter directives (used in profile strings):
.Bl -tag -width "include_state=states"
.It Va local_port=ports
Match connections with local port in the comma-separated list
(up to 8 ports).
.It Va remote_port=ports
Match connections with remote port in the comma-separated list.
.It Va exclude=states
Exclude connections in the given TCP states (comma-separated).
State names:
.Cm closed , listen , syn_sent , syn_received , established ,
.Cm close_wait , fin_wait_1 , closing , last_ack , fin_wait_2 ,
.Cm time_wait .
.It Va include_state=states
Include only connections in the given TCP states.
Mutually exclusive with
.Va exclude .
.It Va local_addr=addr[/prefix]
Match connections with local address matching the given IPv4 CIDR
or IPv6 prefix.
.It Va remote_addr=addr[/prefix]
Match connections with remote address matching the given CIDR/prefix.
.It Va ipv4_only
Only emit IPv4 connections.
.It Va ipv6_only
Only emit IPv6 connections.
.It Va format=compact|full
Select compact (default) or full field output.
.It Va fields=groups
Comma-separated list of field groups to populate:
.Cm identity , state , congestion , rtt , sequences , counters ,
.Cm timers , buffers , ecn , names , all , default .
.El
.Ss Named Profiles
Named filter profiles can be created via sysctl, each producing a
per-profile device node under
.Pa /dev/tcpstats/ .
.Pp
Create a profile:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.tcpstats.profile_set="web local_port=80,443 exclude=listen"
.Ed
.Pp
Read from the profile device:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cat /dev/tcpstats/web | hexdump -C
.Ed
.Pp
Delete a profile by writing just the name:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.tcpstats.profile_set="web"
.Ed
.Sh MIB Variables
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available:
.Bl -tag -width "dev.tcpstats.max_concurrent_readers"
.It Va dev.tcpstats.max_open_fds
Maximum concurrent open file descriptors across all devices.
Default: 16.
.It Va dev.tcpstats.max_concurrent_readers
Maximum concurrent
.Fn read
calls.
Default: 32.
.It Va dev.tcpstats.max_read_duration_ms
Maximum
.Fn read
iteration time in milliseconds.
0 means unlimited.
Default: 5000.
.It Va dev.tcpstats.min_read_interval_ms
Minimum interval between reads per file descriptor in milliseconds.
0 means unlimited.
Default: 0.
.It Va dev.tcpstats.reads_total
Total number of
.Fn read
calls serviced (read-only).
.It Va dev.tcpstats.active_fds
Number of currently open file descriptors (read-only).
.It Va dev.tcpstats.opens_total
Total number of
.Fn open
calls (read-only).
.It Va dev.tcpstats.last_error
Last filter parse error message (read-only).
.It Va dev.tcpstats.profile_set
Create, update, or delete named filter profiles (read-write).
.El
.Sh IOCTLS
The following
.Xr ioctl 2
commands are supported:
.Bl -tag -width "TCPSTATS_VERSION_CMD"
.It Dv TCPSTATS_VERSION_CMD
Returns a
.Vt struct tcpstats_version
containing the protocol version, record size, and an approximate
count of TCP connections.
.It Dv TCPSTATS_SET_FILTER
Installs a
.Vt struct tcpstats_filter
to control which connections and fields are emitted on subsequent reads.
.It Dv TCPSTATS_RESET
Resets the read state, allowing the device to be read again.
Without this, a second
.Fn read
returns EOF.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Read all TCP connections as raw records:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
dd if=/dev/tcpstats bs=320 count=10 | hexdump -C
.Ed
.Pp
Create a named profile for HTTPS monitoring:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.tcpstats.profile_set="https local_port=443 exclude=listen,timewait"
cat /dev/tcpstats/https > /tmp/tcp_snapshot.bin
.Ed
.Pp
Check module statistics:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysctl dev.tcpstats
.Ed
.Ss Userspace Client
The
.Lk https://github.com/randomizedcoder/bsd-xtcp bsd-xtcp
project provides a Rust client that reads
.Pa /dev/tcpstats
and outputs JSON Lines.
To build and run on
.Fx :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg install -y rust protobuf git-tiny
git clone --depth 1 https://github.com/randomizedcoder/bsd-xtcp.git
cd bsd-xtcp
cargo build --release -p bsd-xtcp
kldload tcpstats
\&./target/release/bsd-xtcp --count 1 --pretty
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr dtrace 1 ,
.Xr ioctl 2 ,
.Xr read 2 ,
.Xr siftr 4 ,
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr loader.conf 5 ,
.Xr sysctl 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
module first appeared in
.Fx 14.4
and
.Fx 15.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
module was written by
.An Dave Seddon
as part of the bsd-xtcp project.
