.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd Feb 19, 2001
.Dt 3DFX 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tdfx
.Nd Voodoo Graphics and VoodooII Memory Access GLIDE Device Driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device tdfx
.Pp
.Cd options TDFX_LINUX
.Pp
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This driver creates a entry in /dev that allows programs (mostly
.Em GLIDE-based software )
to access the device memory of the Voodoo Graphics and
VoodooII 3D accellerators created by
.Em 3Dfx, Inc.
This provides an interface
for applications based on the
.Em GLIDE API
or that simply use the API
provided by the linux /dev/3dfx device to use the video device.
.Pp
Supports all cards based on the following chipsets:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Em 3Dfx Voodoo Graphics
.Em 3Dfx Voodoo II
.Ed
.Pp
Specifically, the following cards should work:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Em Diamond Multimedia Monster 3D
.Em Diamond Multimedia Monster 3D II
.Ed
.Pp
Note that this driver does not currently have support for the Voodoo
Banshee, Voodoo3, Voodoo5, or Voodoo6 based cards. It also does not
currently support the Voodoo Rush. It also does not yet handle the SLI
feature of the Voodoo II boards. You can only use each of them
separately.
.Pp
The following kernel configuration options are available:
.Pp
.Em options LINUX_TDFX
.Pp
Enable the linux ioctl code for this driver, where the only supported
applications currently reside.
.Pp
.Sh FILES
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width /dev/voodoo* -compact
.It Pa /dev/3dfx
Symlinked to default
.Em 3dfx
board
.It Pa /dev/3dfx*
.Em Character Device
programming interface
.El
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width /dev/voodoo* -compact
.It Pa /dev/voodoo
Mirrors of above interfaces
.It Pa /dev/voodoo*
(Some apps use /dev/voodoo)
.El
.Pp
.Sh AUTHORS
The driver was developed by Coleman Kane <cokane@micro.ti.com> after
the linux version of this driver by Darryll Straus, John Taylor, Jens
Axboe, Carlo Wood <carlo@alinoe.com> and Joseph Kain <joseph@3dfx.com>
to be directly compatible with it and support the many GLIDE based games
available for Linux and UNIX.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Fx 5.0.
and was originally developed for Linux kernel 2.0.x, later written for
2.2.x and 2.4.x.
