.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998, 1999
.\"	Bill Paul <wpaul@ctr.columbia.edu>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY Bill Paul AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL Bill Paul OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 16, 2005
.Dt TI 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ti
.Nd "Alteon Networks Tigon I and Tigon II Gigabit Ethernet driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile support for the
.Nm
driver into your kernel, place the following lines in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device ti"
.Cd "options TI_PRIVATE_JUMBOS"
.Cd "options TI_JUMBO_HDRSPLIT"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the
.Nm
driver at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ti_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on
the Alteon Networks Tigon Gigabit Ethernet controller chip.
The Tigon
contains an embedded R4000 CPU, gigabit MAC, dual DMA channels and
a PCI interface unit.
The Tigon II contains two R4000 CPUs and other
refinements.
Either chip can be used in either a 32-bit or 64-bit PCI
slot.
Communication with the chip is achieved via PCI shared memory
and bus master DMA.
The Tigon I and II support hardware multicast
address filtering, VLAN tag extraction and insertion, and jumbo
Ethernet frames sizes up to 9000 bytes.
Note that the Tigon I chipset
is no longer in active production: all new adapters should come equipped
with Tigon II chipsets.
.Pp
While the Tigon chipset supports 10, 100 and 1000Mbps speeds, support for
10 and 100Mbps speeds is only available on boards with the proper
transceivers.
Most adapters are only designed to work at 1000Mbps,
however the driver should support those NICs that work at lower speeds
as well.
.Pp
Support for jumbo frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to receive and transmit jumbo frames.
Using jumbo frames can greatly improve performance for certain tasks,
such as file transfers and data streaming.
.Pp
Header splitting support for Tigon 2 boards (this option has no effect for
the Tigon 1) can be turned on with the
.Dv TI_JUMBO_HDRSPLIT
option.
See
.Xr zero_copy 9
for more discussion on zero copy receive and header splitting.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver normally uses jumbo receive buffers allocated by the
.Xr sendfile 2
buffer allocator, but can be configured to use its own private pool of
jumbo buffers that are contiguous instead of buffers from the jumbo
allocator, which are made up of multiple page sized chunks.
To turn on private jumbos, use the
.Dv TI_PRIVATE_JUMBOS
option.
.Pp
Support for vlans is also available using the
.Xr vlan 4
mechanism.
See the
.Xr vlan 4
man page for more details.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It autoselect
Enable autoselection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the autoselected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Ar mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Ar full-duplex
or
.Ar half-duplex
modes.
.It 1000baseSX
Set 1000Mbps (Gigabit Ethernet) operation.
Only full
.Ar full-duplex
mode is supported at this speed.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It full-duplex
Force full duplex operation
.It half-duplex
Force half duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Gigabit Ethernet adapters based on the
Alteon Tigon I and II chips.
The
.Nm
driver has been tested with the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
3Com 3c985-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 1)
.It
3Com 3c985B-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter (Tigon 2)
.It
Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)
.It
Alteon AceNIC V Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)
.It
Digital EtherWORKS 1000SX PCI Gigabit adapter
.It
Netgear GA620 Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseSX)
.It
Netgear GA620T Gigabit Ethernet adapter (1000baseT)
.El
.Pp
The following adapters should also be supported but have
not yet been tested:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Asante GigaNIX1000T Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.It
Asante PCI 1000BASE-SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.It
Farallon PN9000SX Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.It
NEC Gigabit Ethernet
.It
Silicon Graphics PCI Gigabit Ethernet adapter
.El
.Sh IOCTLS
In addition to the standard
.Xr socket 2
.Xr ioctl 2
calls implemented by most network drivers, the
.Nm
driver also includes a character device interface that can be used for
additional diagnostics, configuration and debugging.
With this character
device interface, and a specially patched version of
.Xr gdb 1 ,
the user can
debug firmware running on the Tigon board.
.Pp
These ioctls and their arguments are defined in the
.In sys/tiio.h
header file.
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv ALT_WRITE_TG_MEM"
.It Dv TIIOCGETSTATS
Return card statistics DMAed from the card into kernel memory approximately
every 2 seconds.
(That time interval can be changed via the
.Dv TIIOCSETPARAMS
ioctl.)
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_stats" .
.It Dv TIIOCGETPARAMS
Get various performance-related firmware parameters that largely affect how
interrupts are coalesced.
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_params" .
.It Dv TIIOCSETPARAMS
Set various performance-related firmware parameters that largely affect how
interrupts are coalesced.
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_params" .
.It Dv TIIOCSETTRACE
Tell the NIC to trace the requested types of information.
The argument is
.Vt ti_trace_type .
.It Dv TIIOCGETTRACE
Dump the trace buffer from the card.
The argument is
.Vt "struct ti_trace_buf" .
.It Dv ALT_ATTACH
This ioctl is used for compatibility with Alteon's Solaris driver.
They apparently only have one character interface for debugging, so they have
to tell it which Tigon instance they want to debug.
This ioctl is a noop for
.Fx .
.It Dv ALT_READ_TG_MEM
Read the requested memory region from the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_mem" .
.It Dv ALT_WRITE_TG_MEM
Write to the requested memory region on the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_mem" .
.It Dv ALT_READ_TG_REG
Read the requested register on the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_reg" .
.It Dv ALT_WRITE_TG_REG
Write to the requested register on the Tigon board.
The argument is
.Vt "struct tg_reg" .
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width ".Pa /dev/ti[0-255]" -compact
.It Pa /dev/ti[0-255]
Tigon driver character interface.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ti%d: couldn't map memory"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "ti%d: couldn't map interrupt"
A fatal initialization error has occurred.
.It "ti%d: no memory for softc struct!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for per-device instance information
during initialization.
.It "ti%d: failed to enable memory mapping!"
The driver failed to initialize PCI shared memory mapping.
This might
happen if the card is not in a bus-master slot.
.It "ti%d: no memory for jumbo buffers!"
The driver failed to allocate memory for jumbo frames during
initialization.
.It "ti%d: bios thinks we're in a 64 bit slot, but we aren't"
The BIOS has programmed the NIC as though it had been installed in
a 64-bit PCI slot, but in fact the NIC is in a 32-bit slot.
This happens
as a result of a bug in some BIOSes.
This can be worked around on the
Tigon II, but on the Tigon I initialization will fail.
.It "ti%d: board self-diagnostics failed!"
The ROMFAIL bit in the CPU state register was set after system
startup, indicating that the on-board NIC diagnostics failed.
.It "ti%d: unknown hwrev"
The driver detected a board with an unsupported hardware revision.
The
.Nm
driver supports revision 4 (Tigon 1) and revision 6 (Tigon 2) chips
and has firmware only for those devices.
.It "ti%d: watchdog timeout"
The device has stopped responding to the network, or there is a problem with
the network connection (cable).
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sendfile 2 ,
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr vlan 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr zero_copy 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
device driver first appeared in
.Fx 3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Bill Paul Aq wpaul@bsdi.com .
The header splitting firmware modifications, character
.Xr ioctl 2
interface and debugging support were written by
.An Kenneth Merry Aq ken@FreeBSD.org .
Initial zero copy support was written by
.An Andrew Gallatin Aq gallatin@FreeBSD.org .
