.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991 The Regents of the University of California.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by the University of
.\"	California, Berkeley and its contributors.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"     @(#)tp.4	6.4 (Berkeley) 3/28/91
.\"
.Dd March 28, 1991
.Dt TP 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm TP
.Nd
.Tn ISO
Transport Protocol
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/socket.h>
.Fd #include <netiso/iso_errno.h>
.Fd #include <netiso/tp_param.h>
.Fd #include <netiso/tp_user.h>
.Ft int
.Fn socket "[AF_INET, AF_ISO]" SOCK_SEQPACKET 0
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Pp
The
.Tn TP
protocol provides reliable, flow-controlled, two-way
transmission of data and record boundaries. 
It is a byte-stream protocol and is accessed according to
the
.Dv SOCK_SEQPACKET
abstraction.
The
.Tn TP
protocol makes use of a standard
.Tn ISO
address format,
including a Network Service Access Point, and a Transport Service Entity
Selector.
Subclass 4 may make use of the internet
Internet address format.
.Pp
Sockets utilizing the tp protocol are either
.Dq active
or
.Dq passive .
Active sockets initiate connections to passive
sockets.  By default
.Tn TCP
sockets are created active; to create a
passive socket the
.Xr listen 2
system call must be used
after binding the socket with the
.Xr bind 2
system call.  Only
passive sockets may use the 
.Xr accept 2
call to accept incoming connections.  Only active sockets may
use the
.Xr connect 2
call to initiate connections.
.Pp
Passive sockets may
.Dq underspecify
their location to match
incoming connection requests from multiple networks.  This
technique, termed
.Dq wildcard addressing ,
allows a single
server to provide service to clients on multiple networks.
To create a socket which listens on all networks, the
.Tn NSAP
portion
of the bound address must be void (of length zero).
The Transport Selector may still be specified
at this time; if the port is not specified the system will assign one.
Once a connection has been established the socket's address is
fixed by the peer entity's location.   The address assigned the
socket is the address associated with the network interface
through which packets are being transmitted and received.
.Pp
The
.Tn ISO
Transport Protocol implemented for
.Tn AOS R2
at the University of Wisconsin - Madison,
and modified for inclusion in the Berkeley Software Distribution,
includes classes 0 and 4 
of the
.Tn ISO
transport protocols
as specified in
the June 1986 version of
.Tn IS
8073.
Class 4 of the protocol provides reliable, sequenced,
flow-controlled, two-way
transmission of data packets with an alternate stop-and-wait data path called
the "expedited data" service.
Class 0 is essentially a null transport protocol, which is used
when the underlying network service provides reliable, sequenced,
flow-controlled, two-way data transmission.
Class 0 does not provide the expedited data service.
The protocols are implemented as a single transport layer entity 
that coexists with the Internet protocol suite.
Class 0 may be used only in the
.Tn ISO
domain.
Class 4 may be used in the Internet domain as well as in the
.Tn ISO
domain.
.Pp
Two system calls were modified from the previous
release of the Berkeley Software Distribution
to permit the support the end-of-transport-service-data-unit
.Pq Dv EOTSDU
indication, and for the receipt and transmission of user
connect, confirm, and disconnect data.
See
.Xr sendmsg 2
and
.Xr recmsgv 2 ,
and further discussion
below for the formats of the data in the ancillary data buffer.
If the
.Dv EOTSDU
is not needed, the normal
.Xr read 2 ,
and
.Xr write 2
system calls may be used.
.Pp
Through the 
.Xr getsockopt
and
.Xr setsockopt
system calls,
.Tn TP
supports several options 
to control such things as negotiable options
in the protocol and protocol strategies.
The options are defined in
.Aq Pa netiso/tp_user.h ,
and are described below.
.Pp
In the tables below,
the options marked with a pound sign
.Ql \&#
may be used 
with
.Xr setsockopt
after a connection is established.
Others must be used before the connection
is established, in other words,
before calling
.Xr connect
or 
.Xr accept .
All options may be used 
with
.Xr getsockopt
before or
after a connection is established.
.Bl -tag -width TPOPT_PSTATISTICS
.It Dv TPOPT_CONN_DATA
(char *) [none]
.br
Data to send on
.Xr connect .
The passive user may issue a
.Xr getsockopt
call to retrieve a connection request's user data,
after having done the
.Xr accept
system call without implying confirmation of the connection.
.Pp
The data may also be retrieved by issuing a
.Xr recvmsg
request for ancillary data only,
without implying confirmation of the connection.
The returned
.Va cmsghdr
will contain
.Dv SOL_TRANSPORT
for the
.Va csmg_level
and
.Dv TPOPT_CONN_DATA
for
.Va cmsg_type.
.It Dv TPOPT_DISC_DATA \&#
(char *) [none]
.br
Data to send on
.Xr close .
Disconnect data may be sent by the side initiating the close
but not by the passive side ("passive" with respect to the closing
of the connection), so there is no need to read disconnect data
after calling
.Xr close .
This may be sent by a
.Xr setsockopt
system call, or by issuing a
.Xr sendmsg
request specifying ancillary data only.
The user-provided
.Va cmsghdr
must contain
.Dv SOL_TRANSPORT
for
.Va csmg_level
and
.Dv TPOPT_DISC_DATA
for
.Va cmsg_type .
Sending of disconnect data will in of itself tear down (or reject)
the connection.
.It Dv TPOPT_CFRM_DATA \&#
(char *) [none]
.br
Data to send when confirming a connection.
This may aslo be sent by a 
.Xr setsockopt
system call, or by issuing a
.Xr sendmsg
request, as above.
Sending of connect confirm data will cause the connection
to be confirmed rather than rejected.
.It Dv TPOPT_PERF_MEAS \&#
Boolean.
.br
When
.Xr true ,
performance measurements will be kept
for this connection.  
When set before a connection is established, the
active side will use a locally defined parameter on the
connect request packet; if the peer is another
.Tn ARGO
implementation, this will cause performance measurement to be
turned on 
on the passive side as well.
See
.Xr tpperf 8 .
.It Dv TPOPT_PSTATISTICS
No associated value on input.
On output,
.Ar struct tp_pmeas .
.Pp
This command is used to read the performance statistics accumulated
during a connection's lifetime.
It can only be used with
.Xr getsockopt .
The structure it returns is described in
.Aq Pa netiso/tp_stat.h .
See
.Xr tpperf 8 .
.It Dv TPOPT_FLAGS
unsigned integer. [0x0]
.br
This command can only be used with
.Xr getsockopt .
See the description of the flags below.
.It Dv TPOPT_PARAMS
.Ar struct tp_conn_param
.br
Used to get or set a group parameters for a connection.
The
.Ar struct tp_conn_param
is the argument used with the
.Xr getsockopt
or
.Xr setsockopt
system call. 
It is described in 
.Aq Pa netiso/tp_user.h .
.Pp
The fields of the
.Ar tp_conn_param
structure are
described below.
.El
.Pp
.Em Values for TPOPT_PARAMS:
.Bl -tag -width p_sendack_ticks
.It Ar p_Nretrans
nonzero short integer [1]
.br
Number of times a TPDU
will be retransmitted before the
local TP entity closes a connection.
.It Ar p_dr_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks between retransmissions of disconnect request
TPDUs.
.It Ar p_dt_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks between retransmissions of data
TPDUs.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_cr_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks between retransmissions of connection request
TPDUs.
.It Ar p_cc_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks between retransmissions of connection confirm
TPDUs.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_x_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks between retransmissions of expedited data
TPDUs.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_sendack_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks that the local TP entity
will wait before sending an acknowledgment for normal data
(not applicable if the acknowlegement strategy is
.Dv TPACK_EACH ) .
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_ref_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks for which a reference will
be considered frozen after the connection to which
it applied is closed.
This parameter applies to classes 4 and 0 in the 
.Tn ARGO
implementation, despite the fact that
the frozen reference function is required only for
class 4.
.It Ar p_inact_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks without an incoming packet from the peer after which 
.Tn TP
close the connection.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_keepalive_ticks
nonzero short integer [various]
.br
Number of clock ticks between acknowledgments that are sent
to keep an inactive connection open (to prevent the peer's
inactivity control function from closing the connection).
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_winsize
short integer between 128 and 16384. [4096 bytes]
.br
The buffer space limits in bytes for incoming and outgoing data.
There is no way to specify different limits for incoming and outgoing
paths.
The actual window size at any time
during the lifetime of a connection
is a function of the buffer size limit, the negotiated
maximum TPDU
size, and the 
rate at which the user program receives data.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_tpdusize
unsigned char between 0x7 and 0xd. 
[0xc for class 4] [0xb for class 0]
.br
Log 2 of the maximum TPDU size to be negotiated.
The
.Tn TP
standard
.Pf ( Tn ISO
8473) gives an upper bound of 
0xd for class 4 and 0xb for class 0.
The
.Tn ARGO
implementation places upper bounds of
0xc on class 4 and 0xb on class 0.
.It Ar p_ack_strat
.Dv TPACK_EACH
or
.Dv TPACK_WINDOW.
.Bq Dv TPACK_WINDOW
.br
This parameter applies only to class 4.
Two acknowledgment strategies are supported:
.Pp
.Dv TPACK_EACH means that each data TPDU
is acknowledged
with an AK TPDU.
.Pp
.Dv TPACK_WINDOW
means that upon receipt of the packet that represents
the high edge of the last window advertised, and AK TPDU is generated.
.It Ar p_rx_strat
4 bit mask
.Bq Dv TPRX_USE_CW No \&|\  Dv TPRX_FASTSTART
over
connectionless network protocols]
.Pf [ Dv TPRX_USE_CW
over
connection-oriented network protocols]
.br
This parameter applies only to class 4.
The bit mask may include the following values:
.Pp
.Dv TPRX_EACH :
When a retransmission timer expires, retransmit
each packet in the send window rather than
just the first unacknowledged packet.
.Pp
.Dv TPRX_USE_CW :
Use a "congestion window" strategy borrowed
from Van Jacobson's congestion window strategy for TCP.
The congestion window size is set to one whenever
a retransmission occurs.
.Pp
.Dv TPRX_FASTSTART :
Begin sending the maximum amount of data permitted
by the peer (subject to availability).
The alternative is to start sending slowly by 
pretending the peer's window is smaller than it is, and letting
it slowly grow up to the real peer's window size.
This is to smooth the effect of new connections on a congested network
by preventing a transport connection from suddenly 
overloading the network with a burst of packets.
This strategy is also due to Van Jacobson.
.It Ar p_class
5 bit mask
.Bq Dv TP_CLASS_4 No \&|\  Dv TP_CLASS_0
.br
Bit mask including one or both of the values
.Dv TP_CLASS_4
and
.Dv TP_CLASS_0 .
The higher class indicated is the preferred class.
If only one class is indicated, negotiation will not occur
during connection establishment.
.It Ar p_xtd_format
Boolean.
[false]
.br
Boolean indicating that extended format shall be negotiated.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_xpd_service
Boolean.
[true]
.br
Boolean indicating that 
the expedited data transport service will be negotiated.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_use_checksum
Boolean.
[true]
.br
Boolean indicating the the use of checksums will be negotiated.
This parameter applies only to class 4.
.It Ar p_use_nxpd
Reserved for future use.
.It Ar p_use_rcc
Reserved for future use.
.It Ar p_use_efc
Reserved for future use.
.It Ar p_no_disc_indications
Boolean.
[false]
.Pp
Boolean indicating that the local
.Tn TP
entity shall not issue
indications (signals) when a
.Tn TP
connection is disconnected.
.It Ar p_dont_change_params
Boolean.  [false]
.br
If
.Em true
the
.Tn TP
entity will not override
any of the other values given in this structure.
If the values cannot be used, the
.Tn TP
entity will drop, disconnect,
or refuse to establish the connection to which this structure pertains.
.It Ar p_netservice
One of {
.Dv ISO_CLNS ,
.Dv ISO_CONS ,
.Dv ISO_COSNS ,
.Dv IN_CLNS } .
.Pf [ Dv ISO_CLNS ]
.br
Indicates which network service is to be used.
.Pp
.Dv ISO_CLNS
indicates the connectionless network service provided
by CLNP 
.Pf ( Tn ISO
8473).
.Pp
.Dv ISO_CONS
indicates the connection-oriented network service provided
by X.25
.Pf ( Tn ISO
8208) and
.Tn ISO
8878.
.Pp
.Dv ISO_COSNS
indicates the 
connectionless network service running over a
connection-oriented subnetwork service: CLNP 
.Pf ( Tn ISO
8473) over X.25
.Pf ( Tn ISO
8208).
.Pp
.Dv IN_CLNS
indicates the 
DARPA Internet connectionless network service provided by IP (RFC 791).
.It Ar p_dummy
Reserved for future use.
.El
.Pp
The
.Dv TPOPT_FLAGS
option is used for obtaining
various boolean-valued options.
Its meaning is as follows.
The bit numbering used is that of the RT PC, which means that bit
0 is the most significant bit, while bit 8 is the least significant bit.
.sp 1
.Em Values for TPOPT_FLAGS:
.Bl -tag -width Bitsx
.It Sy Bits
.Sy Description [Default]
.It \&0
.Dv TPFLAG_NLQOS_PDN :
set when the quality of the 
network service is
similar to that of a public data network.
.It \&1
.Dv TPFLAG_PEER_ON_SAMENET :
set when the peer
.Tn TP
entity
is considered to be on the same network as the local
.Tn TP
entity.
.It \&2
Not used.
.It \&3
.Dv TPFLAG_XPD_PRES :
set when expedited data are present
[0]
.It 4\&..7
Reserved.
.El
.Sh ERROR VALUES
.Pp
The
.Tn TP
entity returns
.Va errno
error values as defined in
.Aq Pa sys/errno.h
and
.Aq Pa netiso/iso_errno.h .
User programs may print messages associated with these value by
using an expanded version of
.Xr perror
found in the
.Tn ISO
library,
.Pa libisodir.a .
.Pp
If the
.Tn TP
entity encounters asynchronous events
that will cause a transport connection to be closed,
such as
timing out while retransmitting a connect request TPDU,
or receiving a DR TPDU,
the
.Tn TP
entity issues a
.Dv SIGURG
signal, indicating that
disconnection has occurred.
If the signal is issued during a 
a system call, the system call may be interrupted,
in which case the
.Va errno
value upon return from the system call is
.Er EINTR.
If the signal
.Dv SIGURG
is being handled by reading
from the socket, and it was a
.Xr accept 2
that
timed out, the read may result in
.Er ENOTSOCK ,
because the
.Xr accept
call had not yet returned a
legitimate socket descriptor when the signal was handled.
.Dv ETIMEDOUT
(or a some other errno value appropriate to the
type of error) is returned if
.Dv SIGURG
is blocked
for the duration of the system call.
A user program should take one of the following approaches:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Block Dv SIGURG
If the program is servicing
only one connection, it can block or ignore
.Dv SIGURG
during connection 
establishment.
The advantage of this is that the
.Va errno
value
returned is somewhat meaningful.
The disadvantage of this is that
if ignored, disconnection and expedited data indications could be
missed.
For some programs this is not a problem.
.It Handle Dv SIGURG
If the program is servicing more than one connection at a time
or expedited data may arrive or both, the program may elect to
service
.Dv SIGURG .
It can use the
.Fn getsockopt ...TPOPT_FLAGS...
system 
call to see if the signal
was due to the arrival of expedited data or due to a disconnection.
In the latter case, 
.Xr getsockopt
will return
.Er ENOTCONN .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Xr netstat 1 ,
.Xr iso 4 ,
.Xr clnp 4 ,
.Xr cltp 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
protocol
.Ud
.Sh BUGS
The protocol definition of expedited data is slightly problematic,
in a way that renders expedited data almost useless,
if two or more packets of expedited data are send within
time epsilon, where epsilon
depends on the application.
The problem is not of major significance since most applications
do not use transport expedited data.
The problem is this:
the expedited data acknowledgment TPDU
has no field for conveying
credit, thus it is not possible for a
.Tn TP
entity to inform its peer
that "I received your expedited data but have no room to receive more."
The
.Tn TP
entity has the choice of acknowledging receipt of the
XPD TPDU:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It "when the user receives the" XPD TSDU
which may be a fairly long time,
which may cause the sending
.Tn TP
entity to retransmit the packet,
and possibly to close the connection after retransmission, or
.It "when the" Tn TP No "entity receives it"
so the sending entity does not retransmit or close the connection.
If the sending user then tries to send more expedited data
.Dq soon ,
the expedited data will not be acknowledged (until the
receiving user receives the first XPD TSDU).
.El
.Pp
The
.Tn ARGO
implementation acknowledges XPD TPDUs
immediately,
in the hope that most users will not use expedited data requently
enough for this to be a problem.
