.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Semen Ustimenko
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"
.Dd January 28, 1997
.Dt TX 4 i386
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm tx
.Nd
SMC9432TX Fast Ethernet device driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device tx0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Ethernet adapters based on the
SMC 83c170 (EPIC) chips.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
.It link0
Disable autonegotiation
.It link1
Set full-duplex mode
.It link2
Set 100Mbps mode
.El
.Pp
If autonegotiation is enabled, link1 and link2 flags are meaningless.
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "tx%d: device timeout %d packets"
The device stops responding.
.It "tx%d: PCI fatal error occured (%s)"
One of following errors occured: PCI Target Abort, PCI Master Abort, Data
Parity Error or Address Parity Error.
.It "tx%d: WARNING! no link estabilished"
No media connected.
.It "tx%d: malloc failed"
Failed to allocate static buffer for FIFO rings.
.El
.Sh BUGS
.Pp
The multicast packets filtering is not supported. Autonegotiation for
full-duplex modes is not supported. Recover from PCI fatal error is not
implemented.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
