.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008 AnyWi Technologies
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from uark.c
.\"
.\" Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software for any
.\" purpose with or without fee is hereby granted, provided that the above
.\" copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.
.\"
.\" THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
.\" WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
.\" WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
.\" ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
.\" OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd October 7, 2008
.Dt U3G 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm u3g
.Nd USB support for 3G datacards
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device u3g"
.Cd "device ucom"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
u3g_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the multiple USB-to-serial interfaces exposed by
many 3G USB/PCCard modems.
.Pp
The device is accessed through the
.Xr ucom 4
driver which makes it behave like a
.Xr tty 4 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Option GT 3G Fusion, GT Fusion Quad, etc. (only 3G part, not WLAN)
.It
Option GT 3G, GT 3G Quad, etc.
.It
Vodafone Mobile Connect Card 3G
.It
Qualcomm Inc. CDMA MSM
.It
Huawei B190, E180v, E220 ('<Huawei Mobile>')
.It
Novatel U740, MC950D, X950D, etc.
.It
Sierra MC875U, MC8775U, etc.
.El
.Pp
(See
.Pa /sys/dev/usb/serial/u3g.c
for the complete list of supported cards for each vendor
mentioned above.)
.Pp
The supported 3G cards provide the necessary modem port for ppp, or mpd
connections as well as extra ports (depending on the specific device) to
provide other functions (additional command port, diagnostic port, SIM toolkit
port).
.Pp
In some of these devices a mass storage device supported by the
.Xr umass 4
driver is present which contains Windows and Mac OS X drivers.
The device starts up in disk mode (TruInstall, ZeroCD, etc.) and requires
additional commands to switch it to modem mode.
.Pp
The
.Xr u3gstub 4
device will attach temporarily to a 3G device with a mass storage device and
force it to switch to modem mode,
The attach and detach of
.Xr u3gstub
and any driver disk device present on the 3G device is is hidden, unless the
machine was booted in verbose mode (see
.Xr boot 8 ) .
To temporarily unhide the device, set
.Va debug.bootverbose
to 1 using
.Xr sysctl 8
and replug the device.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ucom 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in
.Fx 7.2 ,
is based on the
.Xr uark 4
driver, and written by
.An Andrea Guzzo Aq aguzzo@anywi.com
in September 2008.
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Andrea Guzzo Aq aguzzo@anywi.com
and
.An Nick Hibma Aq n_hibma@FreeBSD.org .
Hardware for testing was provided by AnyWi Technologies, Leiden, NL.
