.\"	$Id: uk.4,v 1.6.2.3 1997/02/28 03:26:41 mpp Exp $
.\" Copyright (c) 1996
.\"	Julian Elischer <julian@freebsd.org>.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd October 11, 1993
.Dt UK 4
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm uk
.Nd scsi user-level driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device uk"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm uk
driver provides support for a 
process to address devices on the scsi bus for which there is no configured
driver. 
.Pp
Prior to
.Fx 2.1 ,
the first unknown device
found will be attached as
.Em uk0
and the next, 
.Em uk1
etc.
Beginning in
.Fx 2.1
it is possible to specify what uk unit a device should
come on line as; refer to
.Xr scsi 4
for details on kernel configuration.
.Pp
A scsi adapter must also be separately configured into the system
before this driver makes sense.
.Pp
.Sh KERNEL CONFIGURATION
If an count is given that number of
.Nm 
devices will be configured into the kernel.


.Pp
.Sh IOCTLS
The 
.Nm
driver has no ioctls of it's own but rather acts as a medium for the
generic 
.Xr scsi 4
ioctls. These are described in
.Em sys/scsiio.h.


.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/uk0XXX -compact
.It Pa /dev/uk[0-255]
uk{x} is the  'xth'unknown device found.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
All
.Xr scsi 4
debug ioctls work on 
.Nm
devices.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr cd 4 ,
.Xr ch 4 ,
.Xr scsi 4 ,
.Xr sd 4 ,
.Xr st 4 ,
.Xr su 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver appeared in 386BSD 0.1.
