.\" Copyright (c) 1997, 1998
.\"	Nick Hibma <n_hibma@FreeBSD.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY NICK HIBMA AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL NICK HIBMA OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 11, 1999
.Dt UKBD 4
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ukbd
.Nd USB keyboard driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device ukbd"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for keyboards that attach to the USB port.
.Nm usb
and one of
.Nm uhci
or
.Nm ohci
must be configured in the kernel as well.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
By default the keyboard subsystem does not create the appropriate devices yet.
Make sure you reconfigure your kernel with the following option in the kernel
config file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
options KBD_INSTALL_CDEV
.Ed
.Pp
Go to /dev and make device nodes kbd*:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sh MAKEDEV kbd0 kbd1
.Ed
.Pp
If both an AT keyboard as well as USB keyboards are used at the same time, the
AT keyboard will appear as kbd0 in /dev.
The USB keyboards will be kbd1, kbd2,
etc.
You can see some information about the keyboard with the following command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kbdcontrol -i < /dev/kbd1 
.Ed
.Pp
or load a keymap with
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kbdcontrol -l keymaps/pt.iso < /dev/kbd1
.Ed
.Pp
See
.Nm kbcontrol
for more possible options.
.Pp
You can swap console keyboards by using the command
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kbdcontrol -k /dev/kbd1
.Ed
.Pp
From this point on onwards the first USB keyboard will be the keyboard
to be used as the console.
.Pp
If you want to use a USB keyboard as your default and not use an AT keyboard at
all, you will have to remove the
.Nm atkbd
from the kernel configuration file.
Because of the order of the device 
initialisation, the USB keyboard will be detected AFTER the console driver
initialises itself and you have to explicitly tellthe console
driver to use the existence of the USB keyboard.  This can be done in
one of the following two ways.
.Pp
Run the following command as a part of system initialization:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
kbdcontrol -k /dev/kbd0 < /dev/ttyv0 > /dev/null
.Ed
.Pp
(Note that as the USB keyboard is the only keyboard, it is accessed as
/dev/kbd0) or otherwise tell the console driver to periodically look for a
keyboard by setting a flag in the kernel configuration file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device sc0 at isa? flags 0x100
.Ed
.Pp
With the above flag, the console driver will try to detect any
keyboard in the system if it didn't detect one while it was
initialized at boot time.
.Sh DRIVER CONFIGURATION
.Bd -literal -offset indent
options KBD_INSTALL_CDEV
.Ed
.Pp
Make the keyboards available through a character device in /dev
.Bd -literal -offset indent
options UKBD_DFLT_KEYMAP
makeoptions "UKBD_DFLT_KEYMAP=fr.iso"
.Ed
.Pp
The above lines will put the French ISO keymap in the ukbd driver.
You can specify any keymap in /usr/share/syscons/keymaps with this
option.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
options KBD_DISABLE_KEYMAP_LOADING
.Ed
.Pp
Don't allow the user to change the keymap.  Note that this options
also has effect on the AT keyboard driver `atkbd'.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/kbd0 -compact
.It Pa /dev/kbd*
blocking device nodes
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
device ukbd
.Ed
.Pp
Add the
.Nm
driver to the kernel.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr kbdcontrol 1 ,
.Xr ohci 4 ,
.Xr syscons 4 ,
.Xr uhci 4 ,
.Xr usb 4 ,
.Xr config 8
.\".Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Lennart Augustsson Aq augustss@cs.chalmers.se
for
.Nx
and was substantially rewritten for
.Fx
by
.An Kazutaka YOKOTA Aq yokota@zodiac.mech.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Nick Hibma Aq n_hibma@FreeBSD.org
with a large amount of input from
.An Kazutaka YOKOTA Aq yokota@zodiac.mech.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp .
