.\" $NetBSD: uplcom.4,v 1.9 2002/02/07 03:15:09 ross Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 The NetBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to The NetBSD Foundation
.\" by Lennart Augustsson.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE NETBSD FOUNDATION, INC. AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE FOUNDATION OR CONTRIBUTORS
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 22, 2006
.Dt UPLCOM 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm uplcom
.Nd USB support for Prolific PL-2303/2303X/2303HX serial adapters driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device uplcom"
.Cd "device ucom"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
uplcom_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for various serial adapters based on the Prolific
PL-2303, PL-2303X and PL-2303HX USB-to-RS232 Bridge chips.
.Pp
The device is accessed through the
.Xr ucom 4
driver which makes it behave like a
.Xr tty 4 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following adapters:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
ATEN UC-232A
.It
BAFO BF-800
.It
BAFO BF-810
.It
Belkin F5U257
.It
ELECOM UC-SGT
.It
HAL Corporation Crossam2+USB IR commander
.It
Hama USB RS-232 Serial Adapter
.It
Hamlet exagerate XURS232
.It
IOGEAR UC-232A
.It
I/O DATA USB-RSAQ
.It
I/O DATA USB-RSAQ2
.It
I/O DATA USB-RSAQ3
.It
Mobile Action MA-620 Infrared Adapter
.It
PLANEX USB-RS232 URS-03
.It
RATOC REX-USB60
.It
Radio Shack USB Serial Cable
.It
Sandberg USB to Serial Link (model number 133-08)
.It
SOURCENEXT KeikaiDenwa 8 (with and without charger)
.It
Sony Ericsson USB Cable (Susteen USB Data Cable)
.It
Willcom W-SIM DD PHS terminal.(WS002IN)
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr tty 4 ,
.Xr ucom 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver
appeared in
.Nx 1.6 .
This manual page was adopted from
.Nx
by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org
in April 2002.
