.\"-
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2015-2016 Kevin Lo <kevlo@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 8, 2025
.Dt URE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ure
.Nd Realtek RTL8152/RTL8153/RTL8156 USB Ethernet driver
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following lines in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device uhci"
.Cd "device ohci"
.Cd "device usb"
.Cd "device miibus"
.Cd "device uether"
.Cd "device ure"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_ure_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver supports the Realtek USB Ethernet Controller family.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media types:
.Bl -tag -width "10baseT/UTP"
.It Cm autoselect
Enable auto selection of the media type and options.
The user can manually override
the auto selected mode by adding media options to the
.Pa /etc/rc.conf
file.
.It Cm 10baseT/UTP
Set 10Mbps operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 100baseTX
Set 100Mbps (Fast Ethernet) operation.
The
.Cm mediaopt
option can also be used to select either
.Cm full-duplex
or
.Cm half-duplex
modes.
.It Cm 1000baseTX
Set 1000baseTX (Gigabit Ethernet) operation over twisted pair.
The Realtek gigE chips support 1000Mbps in
.Cm full-duplex
mode only.
.It Cm 2500base-T
Set 2500Base-T operation over twisted pair.
The Realtek 8156/8156B chips support 2500Mbps in
.Cm full-duplex
mode only.
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following media options for 10/100 operation:
.Bl -tag -width "full-duplex"
.It Cm full-duplex
Force full-duplex operation.
.It Cm half-duplex
Force half-duplex operation.
.El
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports the following USB Ethernet controllers:
.Bl -column "Realtek RTL8168/8169/8110/8211 via rgephy(4)" "10, 100, 1000, and 2500"
.It Model: Ta Speed (Mbps):
.It Realtek RTL8156/RTL8156B/RTL8156BG Ta 10, 100, 1000, and 2500
.It Realtek RTL8153/RTL8153B Ta 10, 100, and 1000
.It Realtek RTL8152 Ta 10 and 100
.It Realtek RTL8168/8169/8110/8211 via rgephy(4) Ta 10, 100, and 1000
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
.Bl -diag
.It "ure%d: watchdog timeout"
A packet was queued for transmission and a transmit command was
issued, however the device failed to acknowledge the transmission
before a timeout expired.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr miibus 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ng_ether 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Kevin Lo Aq Mt kevlo@FreeBSD.org .
