.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Dirk-Willem van Gulik
.\" 	<dirkx@webweaving.org>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. All advertising materials mentioning features or use of this software
.\"    must display the following acknowledgement:
.\"	This product includes software developed by Bill Paul.
.\" 4. Neither the name of the author nor the names of any co-contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"   without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY NICK HIBMA AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL NICK HIBMA OR THE VOICES IN HIS HEAD
.\" BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF
.\" THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\"	$FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 5, 2000
.Dt URIO 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm urio
.Nd USB driver for the Rio500 MP3 player
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device urio0"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for the Rio500 MP3 player from Diamond MultiMedia
which attaches to the USB port.
The
.Nm
device must be configured in the kernel, along with
.Em usb
and one of the
.Em uhci
or
.Em ohci
controllers.
.Pp
Subsequently, the
.Pa /dev/urio0
device can be used by the Rio500 userland applications.
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width /dev/ums0 -compact
.It Pa /dev/urio0
blocking device node
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
The following line in the kernel configuration file adds the
.Nm
driver to the kernel:
.Dl device urio
.Pp
The following commands create the device node in the
.Pa /dev
directory:
.Dl cd /dev
.Dl sh MAKEDEV urio0
.Pp
Finally, to download a song over the
.Tn USB
connection into the Rio500 using the
.Xr rio_add_song 1
utility (see the
.Sx SEE ALSO
section):
.Dl rio_add_song /usr/local/MP3/TraceyChapman/02-Fast-Car.mp3
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ohci 4 ,
.Xr uhci 4 ,
.Xr usb 4
.Rs
.%T The Rio 500 SourceForge Project Web Page
.%O http://rio500.sourceforge.net/
.Re
.Pp
The Rio500 tools from SourceForge
are the actual userland tools used to download,
format or rename songs on players.
When compiling these tools,
the following pre-build configuration command will ensure that
.Pa rio_usb.h
is available in the include path
and that the device used is
.Pa /dev/urio0 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
CFLAGS="-I/usr/include/dev/usb" ./configure \\
    --with-devicepath='/dev' --with-deviceentry='urio0'
.Ed
.\".Sh HISTORY
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Iwasa Kazmi Aq kzmi@ca2.so-net.ne.jp
for
.Fx .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Dirk-Willem van Gulik Aq dirkx@webweaving.org .
