.\" Copyright (c) 2003
.\"	Fraunhofer Institute for Open Communication Systems (FhG Fokus).
.\" 	All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" Author: Hartmut Brandt <harti@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 8, 2003
.Dt UTOPIA 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm utopia
.Nd "driver module for ATM PHY chips"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device utopia
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This module is used by all ATM drivers for cards that use
PMC-Sierra S/Uni and IDT77105/IDT77155
chips to provide uniform functionality.
The module implements status monitoring
in either interrupt or polling mode, media option handling and application
access to chip registers.
.Pp
The driver implements several sysctls that are accessible under the
.Va hw.atm. Ns Ao Ar iface Ac Ns Va .\&
tree, where
.Ar iface
is the name of the ATM interface:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va phy_regs
When reading this sysctl an array of 8-bit unsigned integers is returned
containing all accessible chip registers starting at register 0.
A register can be written by writing three 8-bit unsigned integers to the
sysctl: the register number, the new value and a bit mask.
This changes all bits in the register for which the corresponding bit in the
mask is one to the bit values from value.
Note that not all registers may
be writeable.
.It Va phy_loopback
allows to put the interface in one of several loopback modes.
Not all modes and all combinations of modes are supported on all chips.
The possible modes are:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv UTP_LOOP_NONE Pq No 0x00
No loopback, normal operation.
.It Dv UTP_LOOP_TIME Pq No 0x01
Timing source loopback.
When this is set the transmitter's clock is
derived from the receiver's clock.
.It Dv UTP_LOOP_DIAG Pq No 0x02
Diagnostic loopback.
In this mode the receiver's input is connected to the
transmitter's output.
The receiver gets back everything that is sent.
The
transmitter operates normally.
.It Dv UTP_LOOP_LINE Pq No 0x04
Serial line loopback.
This connects the line receiver to the line transmitter.
The chip transmits all cells back that it receives.
The receiver operates
normally.
.It Dv UTP_LOOP_PARAL Pq No 0x08
Parallel diagnostic loopback.
This feeds back all transmitted cells into the
receiver between the parallel/serial converters.
The transmitter
operates normally.
.It Dv UTP_LOOP_TWIST Pq No 0x10
Twisted pair diagnostic loopback.
Connects the high speed receive data to the
high speed transmit data.
All received data is sent back.
The receiver
operates normally.
.It Dv UTP_LOOP_PATH Pq No 0x20
Diagnostic path loopback.
This connects the receiver input to the transmitter
output just between the path overhead processor and the byte mux.
The
transmitter operates normally.
.El
.It Va phy_type
This is the detected type of the phy chip.
Currently the following chips are
supported:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv UTP_TYPE_UNKNOWN Pq No 0
The module could not determine the type of the PHY chip.
.It Dv UTP_TYPE_SUNI_LITE Pq No 1
PMC-5346 (S/Uni-Lite)
.It Dv UTP_TYPE_SUNI_ULTRA Pq No 2
PMC-5350 (S/Uni-Ultra)
.It Dv UTP_TYPE_SUNI_622 Pq No 3
PMC-5355 (S/Uni-622)
.It Dv UTP_TYPE_IDT77105 Pq No 4
IDT77105 (25.6MBit UTP interface)
.It Dv UTP_TYPE_IDT77155 Pq No 5
IDT77155 (155MBit interface)
.El
.It Va phy_name
This is a string describing the type of the PHY chip.
.It Va phy_stats
Physical and some ATM layer statistics.
These are the statistics usually
provided by the chip.
The data is a returned in the following structure:
.Bd -literal
struct utopia_stats1 {
	uint32_t version;	/* version of this struct */
	uint32_t fill;
	uint64_t rx_sbip;	/* rx section BIP errors */
	uint64_t rx_lbip;	/* rx line BIP errors */
	uint64_t rx_lfebe;	/* rx line far end block errors */
	uint64_t rx_pbip;	/* rx path BIP errors */
	uint64_t rx_pfebe;	/* rx path far end block errors */
	uint64_t rx_cells;	/* received cells */
	uint64_t rx_corr;	/* correctable cell errors */
	uint64_t rx_uncorr;	/* uncorrectable cell errors */
	uint64_t rx_symerr;	/* symbol errors */
	uint64_t tx_cells;	/* transmitted cells */
};
.Ed
.Pp
The current version is 1.
The statistics are updated from the chip once
a second.
On overflow the counters wrap to zero.
Note that not all counters
are meaningful for all PHY chips.
The statistics are cleared by writing an
arbitrary new value (the value is ignored).
.El
.Pp
The
.Nm
module also interfaces with the ifmedia system.
The module reports the current state of the carrier and will issue a
warning message when the carrier state changes.
While the physical media itself cannot be changed, several media options can:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm SDH
If the PHY is a Sonet/SDH chip this flag switches the interface into SDH mode.
If this option is not set (the default) the interface is in Sonet mode.
.It Cm noscramb
If the PHY is a Sonet/SDH chip disable scrambling.
This may be useful for debugging purposes.
.It Cm unassigned
Normally the interface emits idle cells when there are no other cells to
transmit.
This changes the default cell type to unassigned cells.
This
may be needed for interworking with public networks.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr en 4 ,
.Xr fatm 4 ,
.Xr hatm 4 ,
.Xr patm 4 ,
.Xr utopia 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Harti Brandt Aq harti@FreeBSD.org
