.\"-
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2024, Juniper Networks, Inc.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
.\" "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
.\" A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
.\" OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
.\" SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
.\" LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
.\" OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 1, 2024
.Dt VERIEXEC 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm veriexec
.Nd the veriexec device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In dev/veriexec/veriexec_ioctl.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device is used by
.Xr veriexec 8
to query and modify the state of
.Xr mac_veriexec 4 .
.Pp
Once
.Xr mac_veriexec 4
is active, only a process which is marked as
.Ql trusted
(normally only
.Xr veriexec 8 )
is able to more than the
.Dv VERIEXEC_GETSTATE
ioctl.
.Sh IOCTLS
The supported ioctls are described below.
.Bl -tag
.It Dv VERIEXEC_SIGNED_LOAD Vt struct verified_exec_params
Pass file information to
.Xr mac_veriexec 4 .
.Bd -literal
struct verified_exec_params  {
	unsigned char flags;
	char fp_type[VERIEXEC_FPTYPELEN];	/* type of fingerprint */
	char file[MAXPATHLEN];
	unsigned char fingerprint[MAXFINGERPRINTLEN];
};
.Ed
.It Dv VERIEXEC_LABEL_LOAD Vt struct verified_exec_label_params
Pass file information and a label to
.Xr mac_veriexec 4 .
.Bd -literal
struct verified_exec_label_params  {
	struct verified_exec_params params;
	char label[MAXLABELLEN];
};
.Ed
.It Dv VERIEXEC_ACTIVE
.It Dv VERIEXEC_DEBUG_OFF
.It Dv VERIEXEC_DEBUG_ON Vt int level
.It Dv VERIEXEC_ENFORCE
.It Dv VERIEXEC_GETSTATE
.It Dv VERIEXEC_GETVERSION
.It Dv VERIEXEC_LOCK
.It Dv VERIEXEC_VERIFIED_FILE Vt int fd
Rarely needed.
Tells
.Xr mac_veriexec 4
that the file associated with
.Va fd
is verified.
.El
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
device first appeared in
.Nx .
It was added to
.Fx 13.1 .
