.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Greg Lehey
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 30, 2003
.Dt VINUMDEBUG 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vinumdebug
.Nd debug macros for
.Xr vinum 4
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This man page describes
.Xr gdb 4
macros for debugging the
.Xr vinum 4
kernel module.
See
.Xr gdb 4
for the description of the kernel debugging environment.
No further action is required to access the
.Xr vinum 4
debug macros.
They are loaded automatically along with the other macros.
.Sh COMMANDS
.Bl -tag -width ".Ic rrqe Ar rqe"
.It Ic finfo
Show recently freed
.Xr vinum 4
memory blocks.
.It Ic meminfo
Equivalent of the
.Nm vinum Ic info Fl v
command.
.It Ic rq
Show information about the request pointed to by the variable
.Va rq
in the current frame.
.It Ic rqe
Show information about the request element pointed to by the variable
.Va rqe
in the current frame.
.It Ic rqi
Print out a simplified version of the same information as the
.Nm vinum Ic info Fl V
command.
.It Ic rqinfo
Show the
.Xr vinum 4
request log buffer like the
.Nm vinum Ic info Fl V
command.
.It Ic rqq Ar rq
Show information about the request
.Pq Vt "struct rq"
pointed at by
.Ar rq .
.It Ic rqq0
Print information on some
.Xr vinum 4
request structures.
.It Ic rqq1
Print information on some
.Xr vinum 4
request structures.
.It Ic rrqe Ar rqe
Show information about the request element
.Pq Vt "struct rqe"
pointed at by the parameter
.Ar rqe .
.El
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An "Greg Lehey" Aq grog@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr gdb 4 ,
.Xr vinum 4 ,
.Xr vinum 8
