.\" Copyright (c) 2002-2011 Exar Corp.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 16, 2011
.Dt VXGE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vxge
.Nd "Neterion X3100 10GbE Server/Storage adapter driver"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile this driver into the kernel,
place the following line in your
kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device vxge"
.Ed
.Pp
Alternatively, to load the driver as a
module at boot time, place the following line in
.Xr loader.conf 5 :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if_vxge_load="YES"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
driver provides support for Neterion X3100 adapters.
The driver supports TCP Segmentation Offload (TSO/LSO), 
Large Receive Offload (LRO), Jumbo Frames, Receive Traffic Hash (RTH),
VLAN, Promiscuous mode and Multi function mode.
.Pp
The
.Nm
driver supports the following function modes:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "SF1_VP17 - 1 function with 17 VPATHs"
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "MF8_VP2 - 8 functions with 2 VPATHs per function"
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "MF2_VP8 - 2 functions, 8 Paths/Function"
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "MF4_VP4 - 4 Functions, 4 Paths/Function"
.Ed
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "MF8P_VP2 - 8 functions with 2 VPATHs per function required for DirectIO"
.Ed
.Pp
For general information and support, please visit the Neterion support page
.Pa http://www.neterion.com/support/support.html .
.Pp
Support for Jumbo Frames is provided via the interface MTU setting.
Selecting an MTU larger than 1500 bytes with the
.Xr ifconfig 8
utility configures the adapter to transmit and receive Jumbo Frames.
X3100 adapters support Jumbo Frames up to 9600 bytes.
.Pp
For Jumbo Frames, the driver will try to allocate physically contiguous buffers.
Failures to do so may degrade the performance.
To resolve such problems, please visit
.Pa http://www.neterion.com
where additional information and a kernel patch can be found.
.Pp
For more information on configuring this device, see
.Xr ifconfig 8 .
.Sh HARDWARE
The
.Nm
driver supports Neterion X3100 10 Gigabit Ethernet adapters listed in
.Pa http://www.neterion.com .
.Sh SUPPORT
For troubleshooting tips and FAQs, please visit
.Pa http://trac.neterion.com/cgi-bin/trac.cgi/wiki/TitleIndex?anonymous .
.Pp
For any issues please send an email to
.Aq support@neterion.com .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 8 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
driver was written by
.An Neterion
.Aq support@neterion.com .
