.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Tom Rhodes
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 25, 2003
.Dt WLAN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm wlan
.Nd generic 802.11 link-layer support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "device wlan"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
device provides generic code to support 802.11
drivers, including host AP mode.
Currently it is required for the
.Xr wi 4 ,
.Xr an 4
and
.Xr ath 4
drivers but will eventually be required by all 802.11 drivers.
.Pp
If the associated interface is marked for debugging with, for example,
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wi0 debug"
.Pp
then messages describing the operation of the 802.11 protocol will
be sent to the console.
With the interface marked for debugging, doing:
.Pp
.Dl "sysctl debug.ieee80211=1"
.Pp
causes additional messages to be generated.
Many drivers will also display the contents of each 802.11 frame
sent and received when the interface is marked with
both debugging and
.Cm link2 ;
e.g.,
.Pp
.Dl "ifconfig wi0 debug link2"
.Pp
Beware however that some management frames may be processed entirely within
the device and not be received by the host.
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
The module name of
.Nm
was used to be compatible with
.Nx .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr an 4 ,
.Xr ath 4 ,
.Xr awi 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr wi 4
.Sh STANDARDS
More information can be found in the IEEE 802.11 Standard.
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
driver first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
Atsushi Onoe is the original author of this software.
The
.Nx
support was adapted to
.Fx
by
.An -nosplit
.An Sam Leffler .
This manual page was written by
.An Tom Rhodes Aq trhodes@FreeBSD.org .
