.\" Copyright (c) 2010 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This software was developed by SRI International and the University of 
.\" Cambridge Computer Laboratory under DARPA/AFRL contract FA8750-10-C-0237
.\" ("CTSRD"), as part of the DARPA CRASH research program.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHORS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd December 13, 2010
.Dt XEN 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xen 
.Nd Xen Hypervisor Guest (DomU) Support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
To compile para-virtualized (PV) Xen guest support into an i386 kernel, place
the following lines in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options PAE"
.Cd "options XEN"
.Ed
.Pp
To compile hardware-assisted virtualization (HVM) Xen guest support into an
amd64 kernel, place the following line in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "options XENHVM"
.Ed
.Pp
To compile support for Xenbux and Xen PV drivers into an amd64 or i386
kernel, place the following line in your kernel configuration file:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
.Cd "device xenpci"
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The Xen Hypervisor allows multiple virtual machines to be run on a single
computer system.
When first released, Xen required that i386 kernels be compiled
"para-virtualized" as the x86 instruction set was not fully virtualizable.
Primarily, para-virtualization modifies the virtual memory system to use
hypervisor calls (hypercalls) rather than direct hardware instructions to
modify the TLB, although para-virtualized device drivers were also required
to access resources such as virtual network interfaces and disk devices.
.Pp
With later instruction set extensions from AMD and Intel to support fully
virtualizable instructions, unmodified virtual memory systems can also be
supported; this is referred to as hardware-assisted virtualization (HVM).
HVM configurations may either rely on transparently emulated hardware
peripherals, or para-virtualized drivers, which are aware of virtualization,
and hence able to optimize certain behaviors to improve performance or
semantics.
.Pp
.Fx
supports a fully para-virtualized (PV) kernel on the i386 architecture using
.Cd "options XEN" ;
currently, this requires use of a PAE kernel, enabled via
.Cd "options PAE" .
.Pp
.Fx
supports hardware-assisted virtualization (HVM) on both the i386 and amd64
kernels; however, PV device drivers with an HVM kernel are only supported on
the amd64 architecture, and require
.Cd "options XENHVM" .
.Pp
Para-virtualized device drivers are required in order to support certain
functionality, such as processing management requests, returning idle
physical memory pages to the hypevisor, etc.
.Ss Xen DomU device drivers
Adding
.Cd "options xenpci"
to the kernel configuration enables the Xen administrative or
para-virtualized drivers:
.Bl -hang -offset indent -width blkfront
.It Nm balloon
Allow physical memory pages to be returned to the hypervisor as a result of
manual tuning or automatic policy.
.It Nm blkback
Exports local block devices or files to other Xen domains where they can
then be imported via
.Nm blkfront .
.It Nm blkfront
Import block devices from other Xen domains as local block devices, to be
used for file systems, swap, etc.
.It Nm console
Export the low-level system console via the Xen console service.
.It Nm control
Process management operations from Domain 0, including power off, reboot,
suspend, crash, and halt requests.
.It Nm evtchn
Expose Xen events via the
.Pa /dev/xen/evtchn
special device.
.It Nm netback
Export local network interfacest to other Xen domains where they can be
imported via
.Nm netfront .
.It Nm netfront
Import network interfaces from other Xen domains as local network interfaces,
which may be used for IPv4, IPv6, etc.
.It Nm pcifront
Allow physical PCI devices to be passed through into a PV domain.
.It Nm xenpci
Represents the Xen PCI device, an emulated PCI device that is exposed to
HVM domains.
This device allows detection of the Xen hypervisor, and provides interrupt
and shared memory services required to interact with the hypervisor.
.El
.Ss Performance considerations
In general, PV drivers will perform better than emulated hardware, and are
the recommended configuration for HVM installations.
.Pp
Using a hypervisor introduces a second layer of scheduling that may limit the
effectiveness of certain
.Fx
scheduling optimisations.
Among these is adaptive locking, which is no longer able to determine whether
a thread holding a lock is in execution.
It is recommended that adaptive locking be disabled when using Xen:
.Bd -unfilled -offset indent
.Cd "options NO_ADAPTIVE_MUTEXES"
.Cd "options NO_ADAPTIVE_RWLOCKS"
.Cd "options NO_ADAPTIVE_SX"
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pae 4
.Sh HISTORY
Support for
.Nm
first appeared in
.Fx 8.1 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
.Fx
support for Xen was first added by
.An Kip Macy Aq kmacy@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Doug Rabson Aq dfr@FreeBSD.org .
Further refinements were made by
.An Justin Gibbs Aq gibbs@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Adrian Chadd Aq adrian@FreeBSD.org ,
and
.An Colin Percival Aq cperciva@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Robert Watson Aq rwatson@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh BUGS
.Fx
is only able to run as a Xen guest (DomU) and not as a Xen host (Dom0).
.Pp
A fully para-virtualized (PV) kernel is only supported on i386, and not
amd64.
.Pp
Para-virtualized drivers under hardware-assisted virtualization (HVM) kernel
are only supported on amd64, not i386.
.Pp
As of this release, Xen PV DomU support is not heavily tested; instability
has been reported during VM migration of PV kernels.
.Pp
Certain PV driver features, such as the balloon driver, are under-exercised.
