'\" t
.ig
Copyright (C) 1989-1995, 2001, 2002 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.TH GROFF_MS @MAN7EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
groff_ms \- groff ms macros
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B groff
.B \-ms
[
.IR options .\|.\|.\&
]
[
.IR files .\|.\|.\&
]
.br
.B groff
.B \-m\ ms
[
.IR options .\|.\|.\&
]
[
.IR files .\|.\|.\&
]
.\" -----
.SH DESCRIPTION
This manual page describes the GNU version of the
.I ms
macros,
part of the
.I groff
typesetting system.
The
.I ms
macros are mostly compatible with the
documented behavior of the 4.3
.SM BSD
Unix
.I ms
macros (see
.I Differences from troff ms
below for details).
The
.I ms
macros are suitable for reports, letters, books, and
technical documentation.
.\" -----
.SH USAGE
The
.I ms
macro package expects files to have
a certain amount of structure.
The simplest documents can begin with a paragraph macro
and consist of text separated by paragraph macros
or even blank lines.
Longer documents have a structure as follows:
.TP
.B "Document type"
If you use the
.B RP
(report) macro at the beginning of the document,
.I groff
prints the cover page information on its own page;
otherwise it prints the information on the
first page with your document text immediately following.
Other document formats found in AT&T
.I troff
are specific to AT&T
or Berkeley, and are not supported in
.IR "groff ms" .
.TP
.B "Format and layout"
By setting number registers,
you can change your document's type (font and size),
margins, spacing, headers and footers, and footnotes.
See 
.I "Document control registers"
below for more details.
.TP
.B "Cover page"
A cover page consists of a title,
and optionally the author's name and institution,
an abstract, and the date.
See
.I "Cover page macros"
below for more details.
.TP
.B "Body"
Following the cover page is your document.
It consists of paragraphs, headings, and lists.
.TP
.B "Table of contents"
Longer documents usually include a table of contents,
which you can add by placing the
.B TC
macro at the end of your document.
.\" -----
.SS "Document control registers"
The following table lists the document control
number registers.
For the sake of consistency,
set registers related to margins at the beginning of your document,
or just after the
.B RP
macro.
.LP
.ne 9
.B Margin settings
.RS
.na
.TS
cb   s cb s s cb s cb s
afCW s l  s s l  s l  s.
Reg.	Definition	Effective	Default
_
PO	T{
Page offset (left margin)
T}	T{
next page
T}	1i
LL	T{
Line length
T}	next para.	6i
LT	T{
Header/footer length
T}	next para.	6i
HM	T{
Top (header) margin
T}	next page	1i
FM	T{
Bottom (footer) margin
T}	next page	1i
_
.TE
.RE
.LP
.ne 7
.B Text settings
.RS
.TS
cb   s cb s s cb s cb s
afCW s l  s s l  s l  s.
Reg.	Definition	Effective	Default
_
PS	T{
Point size
T}	next para.	10p
VS	T{
Line spacing (leading)
T}	next para.	12p
_
.TE
.RE
.LP
.ne 7
.B Paragraph settings
.RS
.TS
cb cb s cb cb
afCW l s l l .
Reg.	Definition	Effective	Default
_
PI	T{
Initial indent
T}	next para.	5n
PD	T{
Space between paragraphs
T}	next para.	0.3v
QI	T{
Quoted paragraph indent
T}	next para.	5n
_
.TE
.RE
.LP
.ne 7
.B Footnote settings
.RS
.TS
cb cb cb cb
afCW l l l .
Reg.	Definition	Effective	Default
_
FL	Footnote length	next footnote	LL*5/6
FI	Footnote indent	next footnote	2n
FF	Footnote format	next footnote	0
_
.TE
.RE
.LP
.ne 6
.B Other settings
.RS
.TS
cb   s cb s s cb s cb s
afCW s l  s s l  s l  s.
Reg.	Definition	Effective	Default
_
MINGW	T{
Minimum width between columns
T}	next page	2n
_
.TE
.ad
.RE
.\" -----
.SS "Cover page macros"
Use the following macros to create a cover page for your document
in the order shown.
.TP
.B \&.RP [no]
Specifies the report format for your document.
The report format creates a separate cover page.
With no
.B RP
macro,
.I groff
prints a subset of the
cover page on page\~1 of your document.
.IP
If you use the optional
.B no
argument,
.I groff
prints a title page but
does not repeat any of the title page information
(title, author, abstract, etc.\&)
on page\~1 of the document.
.TP
.B \&.P1 
(P-one) Prints the header on page\~1.
The default is to suppress the header.
.TP
.BI "\&.DA [" xxx ]
(optional) Print the current date,
or the arguments to the macro if any,
on the title page (if specified)
and in the footers.
This is the default for
.IR nroff .
.TP
.BI "\&.ND [" xxx ]
(optional) Print the current date,
or the arguments to the macro if any,
on the title page (if specified)
but not in the footers.
This is the default for
.IR troff .
.TP
.B \&.TL
Specifies the document title.
.I Groff
collects text following the
.B TL
macro into the title, until reaching the author name or abstract.
.TP
.B \&.AU
Specifies the author's name.
You can specify multiple authors by using an
.B AU
macro for each author.
.TP
.B \&.AI
Specifies the author's institution.
You can specify multiple institutions.
.TP
.B \&.AB [no]
Begins the abstract.
The default is to print the word
.BR ABSTRACT ,
centered and in italics, above the text of the abstract.
The option
.B no
suppresses this heading.
.TP
.B \&.AE
End the abstract.
.\" -----
.SS Paragraphs
Use the
.B PP
macro to create indented paragraphs,
and the
.B LP
macro to create paragraphs with no initial indent.
.PP
The
.B QP
macro indents all text at both left and right margins.
The effect is identical to the HTML
.B <BLOCKQUOTE>
element.
The next paragraph or heading
returns margins to normal.
.PP
The
.B XP
macro produces an exdented paragraph.
The first line of the paragraph begins at
the left margin,
and subsequent lines are indented
(the opposite of
.BR PP ).
.SS Headings
Use headings to create a hierarchical structure
for your document.
The
.I ms
macros print headings in
.B bold
using the same font family and point size as the body text.
.PP
The following heading macros are available:
.TP
.BI \&.NH \0xx
Numbered heading.
The argument
.I xx
is either a numeric argument to indicate the
level of the heading, or
.I S\ xx\ xx\ \c
".\|.\|."
to set the section number explicitly.
If you specify heading levels out of sequence,
such as invoking
.B ".NH\ 3"
after
.BR ".NH\ 1" ,
.I groff
prints a warning on standard error.
.TP
.B \&.SH
Unnumbered subheading.
.\" -----
.SS Highlighting
The
.I ms
macros provide a variety of methods to highlight
or emphasize text:
.TP
.BI "\&.B [" txt " [" post " [" pre ]]]
Sets its first argument in
.BR "bold type" .
If you specify a second argument,
.I groff
prints it in the previous font after
the bold text, with no intervening space
(this allows you to set punctuation after
the highlighted text without highlighting
the punctuation).
Similarly, it prints the third argument (if any)
in the previous font
.B before
the first argument.
For example,
.RS
.IP
\&.B foo ) (
.RE
.IP
prints
.RB ( foo ).
.IP
If you give this macro no arguments,
.I groff
prints all text following in bold until
the next highlighting, paragraph, or heading macro.
.TP
.BI "\&.R [" txt " [" post " [" pre ]]]
Sets its first argument in
roman (or regular) type.
It operates similarly to the
.B B
macro otherwise.
.TP
.BI "\&.I [" txt " [" post " [" pre ]]]
Sets its first argument in
.IR "italic type" .
It operates similarly to the
.B B
macro otherwise.
.TP
.BI "\&.CW [" txt " [" post " [" pre ]]]
Sets its first argument in a constant width face.
It operates similarly to the
.B B
macro otherwise.
.TP
.BI "\&.BI [" txt " [" post " [" pre ]]]
Sets its first argument in bold italic type.
It operates similarly to the
.B B
macro otherwise.
.TP
.BI "\&.BX [" txt ]
Prints its argument and draws a box around it.
If you want to box a string that contains spaces,
use a digit-width space (\[rs]0).
.TP
.BI "\&.UL [" txt " [" post ]]
Prints its first argument with an underline.
If you specify a second argument,
.I groff
prints it in the previous font after
the underlined text, with no intervening space.
.TP
.B \&.LG
Prints all text following in larger type
(2\~points larger than the current point size) until
the next font size, highlighting, paragraph, or heading macro.
You can specify this macro multiple times
to enlarge the point size as needed.
.TP
.B \&.SM
Prints all text following in
smaller type
(2\~points smaller than the current point size) until
the next type size, highlighting, paragraph, or heading macro.
You can specify this macro multiple times
to reduce the point size as needed.
.TP
.B \&.NL
Prints all text following in
the normal point size
(that is, the value of the
.B PS
register).
.TP
.BI \[rs]*{ text \[rs]*}
Print the enclosed
.I text
as a superscript.
.\" -----
.SS Indents
You may need to indent sections of text.
A typical use for indents is to create nested lists and sublists.
.PP
Use the
.B RS
and
.B RE
macros to start and end a section of indented text, respectively.
The
.B PI
register controls the amount of indent.
.PP
You can nest indented sections as deeply as needed by
using multiple, nested pairs of
.B RS
and
.BR RE .
.\" -----
.SS Lists
The
.B IP
macro handles duties for all lists.
Its syntax is as follows:
.TP
.BI ".IP [" marker " [" width ]]
.IP
The
.I marker
is usually a bullet character
.B \[rs](bu
for unordered lists,
a number (or auto-incrementing number register) for numbered lists,
or a word or phrase for indented (glossary-style) lists.
.IP
The
.I width
specifies the indent for the body of each list item.
Once specified, the indent remains the same for all
list items in the document until specified again.
.\" -----
.br
.ne 15
.SS "Tab stops"
Use the
.B ta
request to set tab stops as needed.
Use the
.B TA
macro to reset tabs to the default (every 5n).
You can redefine the
.B TA
macro to create a different set of default tab stops.
.\" -----
.SS "Displays and keeps"
Use displays to show text-based examples or figures
(such as code listings).
Displays turn off filling, so lines of code can be
displayed as-is without inserting
.B br
requests in between each line.
Displays can be 
.I kept
on a single page, or allowed to break across pages.
The following table shows the display types available.
.RS
.ne 11
.na
.TS
cb   s s    s cbt s s
cb   s cb   s ^   s s
lfCW s lfCW s l   s s.
Display macro	Type of display
With keep	No keep
_
\&.DS L	\&.LD	Left-justified.
\&.DS I [\fIindent\fP]	\&.ID	T{
Indented (default indent in the \fBDI\fP register).
T}
\&.DS B	\&.BD	T{
Block-centered (left-justified, longest line centered).
T}
\&.DS C	\&.CD	Centered.
\&.DS R	\&.RD	Right-justified.
_
.TE
.RE
.ad
.LP
Use the
.B DE
macro to end any display type.
.PP
To
.I keep
text together on a page,
such as
a paragraph that refers to a table (or list, or other item)
immediately following, use the
.B KS
and
.B KE
macros.
The
.B KS
macro begins a block of text to be kept on a single page,
and the
.B KE
macro ends the block.
.PP
You can specify a
.I "floating keep"
using the
.B KF
and
.B KE
macros.
If the keep cannot fit on the current page,
.I groff
holds the contents of the keep and allows text following
the keep (in the source file) to fill in the remainder of
the current page.
When the page breaks,
whether by an explicit
.B bp
request or by reaching the end of the page,
.I groff
prints the floating keep at the top of the new page.
This is useful for printing large graphics or tables
that do not need to appear exactly where specified.
.\" -----
.SS "Tables, figures, equations, and references"
The
.I -ms
macros support the standard
.I groff
preprocessors:
.IR tbl ,
.IR pic ,
.IR eqn ,
and
.IR refer .
Mark text meant for preprocessors by enclosing it
in pairs of tags as follows:
.TP
.BR "\&.TS [H]" " and " \&.TE
Denotes a table, to be processed by the
.I tbl
preprocessor.
The optional
.BR H "\~argument"
instructs
.I groff
to create a running header with the information
up to the
.B TH
macro.
.I Groff
prints the header at the beginning of the table;
if the table runs onto another page,
.I groff
prints the header on the next page as well.
.TP
.BR \&.PS " and " \&.PE
Denotes a graphic, to be processed by the
.I pic
preprocessor.
You can create a
.I pic
file by hand, using the
AT&T
.I pic
manual available on the Web as a reference,
or by using a graphics program such as
.IR xfig .
.TP
.BR "\&.EQ [\fI\,align\/\fP]" " and " \&.EN
Denotes an equation, to be processed by the
.I eqn
preprocessor.
The optional
.I align
argument can be
.BR C ,
.BR L ,
or\~\c
.B I
to center (the default), left-justify, or indent
the equation.
.TP
.BR \&.[ " and " \&.]
Denotes a reference, to be processed by the
.I refer
preprocessor.
The GNU
.IR @g@refer (@MAN1EXT@)
manual page provides a comprehensive reference
to the preprocessor and the format of the
bibliographic database.
.\" -----
.SS Footnotes
The
.I ms
macros provide a flexible footnote system.
You can specify a numbered footnote by using the
.B \[rs]**
escape, followed by the text of the footnote
enclosed by
.B FS
and
.B FE
macros.
.PP
You can specify symbolic footnotes
by placing the mark character (such as
.B \[rs](dg
for the dagger character) in the body text,
followed by the text of the footnote
enclosed by
.B FS\ \[rs](dg
and
.B FE
macros.
.PP
You can control how
.I groff
prints footnote numbers by changing the value of the
.B FF
register as follows:
.RS
.ne 7
.TP
0
Prints the footnote number as a superscript; indents the footnote (default).
.TP
1
Prints the number followed by a period (like\~1.\&)
and indents the footnote.
.TP
2
Like\~1, without an indent.
.TP
3
Like\~1, but prints the footnote number as a hanging paragraph.
.LP
.RE
You can use footnotes safely within keeps and displays,
but avoid using numbered footnotes within floating keeps.
You can set a second
.B \[rs]**
between a
.B \[rs]**
and its corresponding
.BR .FS ;
as long as each
.B .FS
occurs
.I after
the corresponding
.B \[rs]**
and the occurrences of
.B .FS
are in the same order as the corresponding occurrences of
.BR \[rs]** .
.\" -----
.SS "Headers and footers"
There are two ways to define headers and footers:
.IP \(bu 3n
Use the strings
.BR LH ,
.BR CH ,
and
.B RH
to set the left, center, and right headers; use
.BR LF ,
.BR CF ,
and
.B RF
to set the left, center, and right footers.
This works best for documents that do not distinguish
between odd and even pages.
.IP \(bu
Use the
.B OH
and
.B EH
macros to define headers for the odd and even pages; and
.B OF
and
.B EF
macros to define footers for the odd and even pages.
This is more flexible than defining the individual strings.
The syntax for these macros is as follows:
.RS
.IP
.BI "\&.OH '" left ' center ' right '
.RE
.IP
You can replace the quote (') marks with any character not
appearing in the header or footer text.
.\" -----
.SS Margins
You control margins using a set of number registers.
The following table lists the register names and defaults:
.RS
.ne 8
.na
.TS
cb   s cb s s cb s cb s
afCW s l  s s l  s l  s.
Reg.	Definition	Effective	Default
_
PO	T{
Page offset (left margin)
T}	next page	1i
LL	T{
Line length
T}	next para.	6i
LT	T{
Header/footer length
T}	next para.	6i
HM	T{
Top (header) margin
T}	next page	1i
FM	T{
Bottom (footer) margin
T}	next page	1i
_
.TE
.RE
.ad
.PP
Note that there is no right margin setting.
The combination of page offset and line length
provide the information necessary to
derive the right margin.
.\" -----
.SS "Multiple columns"
The
.I ms
macros can set text in as many columns as will reasonably
fit on the page.
The following macros are available.
All of them force a page break if a multi-column mode is already set.
However, if the current mode is single-column, starting a multi-column
mode does
.I not
force a page break.
.TP
.B \&.1C
Single-column mode.
.TP
.B \&.2C
Two-column mode.
.TP
.BI "\&.MC [" width " [" gutter ]]
Multi-column mode.
If you specify no arguments, it is equivalent to the
.B 2C
macro.
Otherwise,
.I width
is the width of each column and
.I gutter
is the space between columns.
The
.B MINGW
number register is the default gutter width.
.\" -----
.SS "Creating a table of contents"
Wrap text that you want to appear in the
table of contents in
.B XS
and
.B XE
macros.
Use the
.B TC
macro to print the table of contents at the end of the document,
resetting the page number to\~\c
.B i
(Roman numeral\~1).
.PP
You can manually create a table of contents
by specifying a page number as the first argument to
.BR XS .
Add subsequent entries using the
.B XA
macro.
For example:
.RS
.PP
.ne 8
.nf
\&.XS 1
Introduction
\&.XA 2
A Brief History of the Universe
\&.XA 729
Details of Galactic Formation
\&.\|.\|.
\&.XE
.fi
.RE  
.LP  
Use the
.B PX  
macro to print a manually-generated table of contents
without resetting the page number.
.PP
If you give the argument
.B no
to either
.B PX
or   
.BR TC ,
.I groff
suppresses printing the title
specified by the
.B \[rs]*[TOC]  
string.
.\" -----
.SH "DIFFERENCES FROM troff ms"
The
.I "groff ms"
macros are a complete re-implementation,
using no original AT&T code.
Since they take advantage of the extended features in
.IR groff ,
they cannot be used with AT&T
.IR troff .
Other differences include:
.IP \(bu 3n
The internals of
.I "groff ms"
differ from the internals of Unix
.IR ms . 
Documents that depend upon implementation details of Unix
.I ms
may not format properly with
.IR "groff ms" .
.IP \(bu
The error-handling policy of
.I "groff ms"
is to detect and report errors,
rather than silently to ignore them.
.IP \(bu
Bell Labs localisms are not implemented.
.IP \(bu
Berkeley localisms, in particular the
.B TM
and
.B CT
macros,
are not implemented.
.IP \(bu
.I "Groff ms"
does not work in compatibility mode (e.g.\& with the
.B \-C
option).
.IP \(bu
There is no support for typewriter-like devices.
.IP \(bu
.I "Groff ms"
does not provide cut marks.
.IP \(bu
Multiple line spacing is not supported
(use a larger vertical spacing instead).
.IP \(bu
Some Unix
.I ms
documentation says that the
.B CW
and
.B GW
number registers can be used to control the column width and
gutter width respectively.
These number registers are not used in groff ms.
.IP \(bu
Macros that cause a reset
(paragraphs, headings, etc.)
may change the indent.
Macros that change the indent do not increment or decrement
the indent, but rather set it absolutely.
This can cause problems for documents that define
additional macros of their own.
The solution is to use not the
.B in
request but instead the
.B RS
and
.B RE
macros.
.IP \(bu
The number register
.B GS
is set to\~1 by the
.I "groff ms"
macros,
but is not used by the Unix
.I ms
macros.
Documents that need to determine whether
they are being formatted with Unix
.I ms
or
.I "groff ms"
should use this number register.
.br
.ne 22
.SS Strings
You can redefine the following strings to adapt the
.I "groff ms"
macros to languages other than English:
.TS
center;
cb cb
afCW l .
String	Default Value
_
REFERENCES	References
ABSTRACT	ABSTRACT
TOC	Table of Contents
MONTH1	January
MONTH2	February
MONTH3	March
MONTH4	April
MONTH5	May
MONTH6	June
MONTH7	July
MONTH8	August
MONTH9	September
MONTH10	October
MONTH11	November
MONTH12	December
_
.TE
.PP
The
.B \[rs]*-
string produces an em dash \[em] like this.
.\" -----
.SS Text Settings
The
.B FAM
string sets the default font family.
If this string is undefined at initialization,
it is set to Times.
.LP
The point size, vertical spacing, and inter-paragraph spacing for footnotes
are controlled by the number registers
.BR FPS ,
.BR FVS ,
and
.BR FPD ;
at initialization these are set to
.BR \[rs]n(PS-2 ,
.BR \[rs]n[FPS]+2 ,
and
.B \[rs]n(PD/2
respectively.
If any of these registers are defined before initialization,
the initialization macro does not change them.
.LP
The hyphenation flags (as set by the
.B hy
request) are set from the
.B HY
register;
the default is\~14.
.PP
Improved accent marks
(as originally defined in Berkeley's
.I ms
version)
are available by specifying the
.B AM
macro at the beginning of your document.
You can place an accent over most characters
by specifying the string defining the accent
directly after the character.
For example,
.B n\[rs]*~ 
produces an n with a tilde over it.
.\" -----
.SH "NAMING CONVENTIONS"
.LP
The following conventions are used for names of macros, strings and
number registers.
External names available to documents that use the
.I "groff ms"
macros contain only uppercase letters and digits.
.LP
Internally the macros are divided into modules;
naming conventions are as follows:
.IP \(bu 3n
Names used only within one module are of the form
.IB \%module * name\fR.
.IP \(bu
Names used outside the module in which they are defined are of the form
.IB \%module @ name\fR.
.IP \(bu
Names associated with a particular environment are of the form
.IB \%environment : name;
these are used only within the
.B par
module.
.IP \(bu
.I name
does not have a module prefix.
.IP \(bu
Constructed names used to implement arrays are of the form
.IB \%array ! index\fR.
.PP
Thus the groff ms macros reserve the following names:
.IP \(bu 3n
Names containing the characters
.BR * ,
.BR @ ,
and\~\c
.BR : .
.IP \(bu
Names containing only uppercase letters and digits.
.SH FILES
.B @MACRODIR@/ms.tmac
(a wrapper file for
.BR s.tmac )
.br
.B @MACRODIR@/s.tmac
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR @g@refer (@MAN1EXT@),
.I Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff
by Trent Fisher and Werner Lemberg.
.SH AUTHOR
Original manual page by James Clark
.IR "et al" ;
rewritten by Larry Kollar
(\fIlkollar@despammed.com\fR).
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
