.ig
groff.man

Last update: 18 Mar 2003

Copyright (C) 1989, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
Rewritten in 2002 by Bernd Warken <bwarken@mayn.de>

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being this .ig-section and AUTHOR, with no
Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover Texts.

A copy of the Free Documentation License is included as a file called
FDL in the main directory of the groff source package.

$FreeBSD$

..
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Setup
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.mso www.tmac
.
.\" set adjust to both
.ad b
.
.\" fonts of fixed length
.
.if n \{\
.  mso tty-char.tmac
.  ftr CR R
.  ftr CI I
.  ftr CB B
.\}
.
.if '\*[.T]'dvi' \
.  ftr CB CW
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" String definitions
.
.ds @- "\-\"
.ds @-- "\-\^\-\"
.
.ds Ellipsis .\|.\|.\"
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Begin of macro definitions
.de c
.\" this is like a comment request when escape mechanism is off
..
.eo
.
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.de TP+
.br
.ns
.TP \$1
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.c the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.  ie \n[.$]=0:((0\$1)*2u>(\n.lu-\n(.iu)) .TP
.  el .TP "\$1"
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Text
.  nop \)\$*
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.de Synopsis
.  ds @arg1 \$1\"
.  nr @old_indent \n[.i]
.  ad l
.  in +\w'\f[B]\*[@arg1]\0'u
.  ti \n[@old_indent]u
.  B \*[@arg1]\0\c
.  rr @old_indent
.  rm @arg1
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.de EndSynopsis
.  ad
.  in
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c ShortOpt[]  (name [arg])
.c
.c short option in synopsis
.c
.de ShortOpt[]
.  if \n[.$]=0 \
.    return
.  ds @opt \$1\"
.  shift
.  ie \n[.$]=0 \
.    Text \f[R][\f[]\f[CB]\*[@-]\*[@opt]\f[]\f[R]]\f[]
.  el \
.    Text \f[R][\f[]\f[CB]\*[@-]\*[@opt]\~\f[]\f[I]\/\$*\f[]\f[R]]\f[]
.  rm @opt
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c Option in synopsis (short option)
.de SynOpt
.  if \n[.$]=0 \
.    return
.  ds @opt \$1\"
.  shift
.  ie \n[.$]=0 \
.    Text \f[R][\f[]\f[CB]\*[@-]\*[@opt]\f[]\f[R]]\f[]
.  el \
.    Text \f[R][\f[]\f[CB]\*[@-]\*[@opt]\~\f[]\f[I]\/\$*\f[]\f[R]]\f[]
.  rm @opt
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c ShortOpt ([char [punct]])
.c
.c `-c' somewhere in the text 
.c second arg is punctuation
.c
.de ShortOpt
.  ds @opt \$1\"
.  shift
.  Text \f[CB]\*[@-]\*[@opt]\f[]\/\$*
.  rm @opt
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c LongOpt  ([name [punct]])
.c
.c `--name' somewhere in the text 
.c second arg is punctuation
.c
.de LongOpt
.  ds @opt \$1\"
.  shift
.  Text \f[CB]\*[@--]\f[]\f[B]\*[@opt]\f[]\/\$*
.  rm @opt
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c OptDef  (shortopt [longopt [argument]])
.c
.c option documentation
.c args : `shortopt', `longopt' can be ""
.c
.de OptDef
.  ds @short
.  ds @long
.  ds @arg
.  if \n[.$]>=1 \{\
.    ds @arg1 "\$1\"
.    if !'\*[@arg1]'' \
.      ds @short "\f[CB]\*[@-]\*[@arg1]\f[]\"
.    if \n[.$]>=2 \{\
.      if !'\*[@short]'' \
.        as @short \f[CW]\0\f[]
.      ds @arg2 "\$2\"
.      if !'\*[@arg2]'' \
.        ds @long "\f[CB]\*[@--]\f[]\f[B]\*[@arg2]\f[]\"
.      if \n[.$]>=3 \{\
.        if !'\*[@long]'' \
.          as @long \|=\|\"
.        shift 2
.        ds @arg \f[I]\$*\"
.      \}
.    \}
.  \}
.  IP "\f[R]\*[@short]\*[@long]\*[@arg]\f[]"
.  rm @arg
.  rm @arg1
.  rm @arg2
.  rm @short
.  rm @long
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c Continuation of an OptDef header.
.de OptDef+
.  br
.  ns
.  OptDef \$@
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c Environment variable
.de EnvVar
.  SM
.  BR \$1 \$2
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c a shell command line
.de ShellCommand
.  nr @font \n[.f]
.  c replace argument separator by unbreakable space
.  ds @args \$1\""
.  shift
.  while (\n[.$]>0) \{\
.    ds @args \*[@args]\~\$1
.    shift
.  \}
.  br
.  ad l
.  nh
.  Text \f[I]sh#\h'1m'\f[P]\f[CR]\*[@args]\f[P]\&\"
.  ft R
.  ft P
.  hy
.  ad
.  ft \n[@font]
.  br
.  rr @font
.  rm @args
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c `char or string'
.de Quoted
.  ft CR
.  Text \[oq]\$*\[cq]
.  ft
..
.c --------------------------------------------------------------------
.c End of macro definitions
.ec
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Title
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.TH GROFF @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.SH NAME
groff \- front-end for the groff document formatting system
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.ad l
.Synopsis groff
.ShortOpt[] abcegilpstzCEGNRSUVXZ
.ShortOpt[] d cs
.ShortOpt[] f fam
.ShortOpt[] F dir
.ShortOpt[] I dir
.ShortOpt[] L arg
.ShortOpt[] m name
.ShortOpt[] M dir
.ShortOpt[] n num
.ShortOpt[] o list
.ShortOpt[] P arg
.ShortOpt[] r cn
.ShortOpt[] T dev
.ShortOpt[] w name
.ShortOpt[] W name
.RI [ file
.Text \*[Ellipsis]]
.EndSynopsis
.
.Synopsis groff
.ShortOpt h
|
.LongOpt help
.EndSynopsis
.
.Synopsis groff
.ShortOpt v
|
.LongOpt version
.RI [ option
.Text \*[Ellipsis]]
.EndSynopsis
.
.P
The command line is parsed according to the usual GNU convention.
.
The whitespace between a command line option and its argument is
optional.
.
Options can be grouped behind a single
.ShortOpt
(minus character).
.
A filename of
.ShortOpt
(minus character) denotes the standard input.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
This document describes the
.B groff
program, the main front-end for the 
.I groff
document formatting system.
.
The
.I groff
program and macro suite is the implementation of a
.BR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
system within the free software collection
.URL http://\:www.gnu.org "GNU" .
.
The
.I groff
system has all features of the classical
.IR roff ,
but adds many extensions.
.
.P
The
.B groff
program allows to control the whole
.I groff
system by command line options.
.
This is a great simplification in comparison to the classical case (which
uses pipes only).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
As
.B groff
is a wrapper program for
.B @g@troff
both programs share a set of options.
.
But the
.B groff
program has some additional, native options and gives a new meaning to
some
.B @g@troff
options.
.
On the other hand, not all
.B @g@troff
options can be fed into
.BR groff .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Native groff Options
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The following options either do not exist for
.B @g@troff
or are differently interpreted by
.BR groff .
.
.
.OptDef e
Preprocess with
.BR @g@eqn .
.
.
.OptDef g
Preprocess with
.BR @g@grn .
.
.
.OptDef G
Preprocess with
.BR grap .
.
.
.OptDef h help
Print a help message.
.
.
.OptDef I "" dir
Add search directory for
.BR \%@g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@).
This option implies the
.ShortOpt s
option.
.
.
.OptDef l
Send the output to a spooler program for printing.
.
The command that should be used for this is specified by the
.B print
command in the device description file, see
.BR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
If this command is not present, the output is piped into the
.BR lpr (1)
program by default.
.
See options
.ShortOpt L
and
.ShortOpt X .
.
.
.OptDef L "" arg
Pass
.I arg
to the spooler program.
Several arguments should be passed with a separate
.ShortOpt L
option each.
.
Note that
.B groff
does not prepend
.ShortOpt\" just a minus sign
(a minus sign) to
.I arg
before passing it to the spooler program.
.
.
.OptDef N
Don't allow newlines within
.I eqn
delimiters.
.
This is the same as the
.ShortOpt N
option in
.BR @g@eqn .
.
.
.OptDef p
Preprocess with
.BR @g@pic .
.
.
.OptDef P "" "\*[@-]option"
.OptDef+ P "" "\*[@-]option \f[CB]\*[@-]P\f[] arg"
Pass
.I \*[@-]option
or
.I \*[@-]option arg
to the postprocessor.
.
The option must be specified with the necessary preceding minus
sign(s)
.Quoted \*[@-]
or
.Quoted \*[@--]
because groff does not prepend any dashes before passing it to the
postprocessor.
.
For example, to pass a title to the gxditview postprocessor, the shell
command
.IP
.ShellCommand groff \*[@-]X \*[@-]P \*[@-]title \*[@-]P 'groff it' \f[I]foo\f[]
.IP
is equivalent to
.IP
.ShellCommand groff \*[@-]X \*[@-]Z \f[I]foo\f[] | \
gxditview \*[@-]title 'groff it' \*[@-]
.
.
.OptDef R
Preprocess with
.BR @g@refer .
.
No mechanism is provided for passing arguments to 
.B @g@refer
because most
.B @g@refer
options have equivalent language elements that can be specified within
the document.
.
See
.BR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@)
for more details.
.
.
.OptDef s
Preprocess with
.BR @g@soelim .
.
.
.OptDef S
Safer mode.
.
Pass the
.ShortOpt S
option to
.B @g@pic
and disable the following
.B @g@troff
requests:
.BR .open ,
.BR .opena ,
.BR .pso ,
.BR .sy ,
and
.BR .pi .
For security reasons, safer mode is enabled by default.
.
.
.OptDef t
Preprocess with
.BR @g@tbl .
.
.
.OptDef T "" dev
Set output device to
.IR dev .
Contrary to
.BR @g@troff ,
.B groff
calls a postprocessor to convert
.BR @g@troff 's
intermediate output to its final format.
Real devices in
.B groff
are
.
.RS
.RS
.IP dvi
TeX DVI format (postprocessor is
.BR grodvi ).
.IP html
HTML output (preprocessors are
.B @g@soelim
and
.BR \%pre-grohtml ,
postprocessor is
.BR \%post-grohtml ).
.IP lbp
Canon CAPSL printers (\%LBP-4 and \%LBP-8 series laser printers;
postprocessor is
.BR grolbp ).
.IP lj4
HP LaserJet4 compatible (or other PCL5 compatible) printers (postprocessor
is
.BR grolj4 ).
.IP ps
PostScript output (postprocessor is
.BR grops ).
.RE
.RE
.
.IP
For the following TTY output devices (postprocessor is always
.BR grotty ),
.ShortOpt T
selects the output encoding:
.RS
.RS
.IP ascii
7bit ASCII.
.IP cp1047
\%Latin-1 character set for EBCDIC hosts.
.IP latin1
ISO \%8859-1.
.IP utf8
Unicode character set in \%UTF-8 encoding.
.RE
.RE
.
.IP
The following arguments select
.B gxditview
as the `postprocessor' (it is rather a viewing program):
.
.RS
.RS
.IP X75
75dpi resolution, 10pt document base font.
.IP X75-12
75dpi resolution, 12pt document base font.
.IP X100
100dpi resolution, 10pt document base font.
.IP X100-12
100dpi resolution, 12pt document base font.
.RE
.RE
.
.IP
The default device is
.BR @DEVICE@ .
.
.
.OptDef U
Unsafe mode.
.
Reverts to the (old) unsafe behaviour; see option
.ShortOpt S .
.
.
.OptDef v version
Output version information of
.B groff
and of all programs that are run by it; that is, the given command line
is parsed in the usual way, passing
.ShortOpt v
to all subprograms.
.
.
.OptDef V
Output the pipeline that would be run by
.BR groff
(as a wrapper program), but do not execute it.
.
.
.OptDef X
Use
.B gxditview
instead of using the usual postprocessor to (pre)view a document.
.
The printing spooler behavior as outlined with options
.ShortOpt l
and
.ShortOpt L 
is carried over to 
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@)
by determining an argument for the
.B \*[@-]printCommand
option of
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
.
This sets the default
.B Print
action and the corresponding menu entry to that value.
.
.ShortOpt X
only produces good results with
.ShortOpt Tps ,
.ShortOpt TX75 ,
.ShortOpt TX75-12 ,
.ShortOpt TX100 ,
and
.ShortOpt TX100-12 .
.
The default resolution for previewing
.ShortOpt Tps
output is 75\|dpi; this can be changed by passing the
.ShortOpt resolution
option to
.BR gxditview ,
for example
.
.IP
.ShellCommand groff \*[@-]X \*[@-]P\*[@-]resolution \*[@-]P100 \*[@-]man foo.1
.
.
.OptDef z
Suppress output generated by
.BR @g@troff .
Only error messages will be printed.
.
.
.OptDef Z
Do not postprocess the output of
.B @g@troff
that is normally
called automatically by
.BR groff .
This will print the intermediate output to standard output; see
.BR \%groff_out (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Transparent Options
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The following options are transparently handed over to the formatter
program
.B @g@troff
that is called by groff subsequently.
.
These options are described in more detail in
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.OptDef a
ascii approximation of output.
.
.OptDef b
backtrace on error or warning.
.
.OptDef c
disable color output.
.
.OptDef C
enable compatibility mode.
.
.OptDef d "" cs
.OptDef+ d "" name=s
define string.
.
.OptDef E
disable
.B @g@troff
error messages.
.
.OptDef f "" fam
set default font family.
.
.OptDef F "" dir
set path for font DESC files.
.
.OptDef i
process standard input after the specified input files.
.
.OptDef m "" name
include macro file \f[I]name\f[]\f[B].tmac\f[] (or
\f[B]tmac.\f[]\f[I]name\f[]); see also
.BR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.OptDef M "" dir
path for macro files.
.
.OptDef n "" num
number the first page
.IR num .
.
.OptDef o "" list
output only pages in
.IR list .
.
.OptDef r "" cn
.OptDef+ r "" name=n
set number register.
.
.OptDef w "" name
enable warning
.IR name .
.
.OptDef W "" name
disable warning
.IR name .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "USING GROFF"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The
.I groff system
implements the infrastructure of classical roff; see
.BR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
for a survey on how a roff system works in general.
.
Due to the front-end programs available within the groff system, using
.I groff
is much easier than
.IR "classical roff" .
.
This section gives an overview of the parts that constitute the groff
system.
.
It complements
.BR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
with groff-specific features.
.
This section can be regarded as a guide to the documentation around
the groff system.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Front-ends
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The
.B groff
program is a wrapper around the
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
program.
.
It allows to specify the preprocessors by command line options and
automatically runs the postprocessor that is appropriate for the
selected device.
.
Doing so, the sometimes tedious piping mechanism of classical
.BR roff (@MAN7EXT@)
can be avoided.
.
.P
The
.BR grog (@MAN1EXT@)
program can be used for guessing the correct groff command line to
format a file.
.
.P
The
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@)
program is an allround-viewer for groff files and man pages.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Preprocessors
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The groff preprocessors are reimplementations of the classical
preprocessors with moderate extensions.
.
The preprocessors distributed with the
.I groff
package are
.
.TP
.BR @g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@)
for mathematical formul\(ae,
.TP
.BR @g@grn (@MAN1EXT@)
for including
.BR gremlin (1)
pictures,
.TP
.BR @g@pic (@MAN1EXT@)
for drawing diagrams,
.TP
.BR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@)
for bibliographic references,
.TP
.BR \%@g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@)
for including macro files from standard locations,
.
.P
and
.TP
.BR @g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@)
for tables.
.
.P
Besides these, there are some internal preprocessors that are
automatically run with some devices.
.
These aren't visible to the user.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "Macro Packages"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Macro packages can be included by option
.ShortOpt m .
.
The groff system implements and extends all classical macro packages
in a compatible way and adds some packages of its own.
.
Actually, the following macro packages come with
.IR groff :
.
.TP
.B man
The traditional man page format; see
.BR \%groff_man (@MAN7EXT@).
It can be specified on the command line as
.ShortOpt man
or
.ShortOpt m
.BR man .
.
.TP
.B mandoc
The general package for man pages; it automatically recognizes
whether the documents uses the
.I man
or the
.I mdoc
format and branches to the corresponding macro package.
.
It can be specified on the command line as
.ShortOpt mandoc
or
.ShortOpt m
.BR mandoc .
.
.TP
.B mdoc
The BSD-style man page format; see
.BR \%groff_mdoc (@MAN7EXT@).
It can be specified on the command line as
.ShortOpt mdoc
or
.ShortOpt m
.BR mdoc .
.
.TP
.B me
The classical
.I me
document format; see
.BR \%groff_me (@MAN7EXT@).
It can be specified on the command line as
.ShortOpt me
or
.ShortOpt m
.BR me .
.
.TP
.B mm
The classical
.I mm
document format; see
.BR \%groff_mm (@MAN7EXT@).
It can be specified on the command line as
.ShortOpt mm
or
.ShortOpt m
.BR mm .
.
.TP
.B ms
The classical
.I ms
document format; see
.BR \%groff_ms (@MAN7EXT@).
It can be specified on the command line as
.ShortOpt ms
or
.ShortOpt m
.BR ms .
.
.TP
.B www
HTML-like macros for inclusion in arbitrary groff documents; see
.BR \%groff_www (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.P
Details on the naming of macro files and their placement can be found
in
.BR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "Programming Language"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
General concepts common to all roff programming languages are
described in
.BR roff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.P
The groff extensions to the classical troff language are documented in
.BR \%groff_diff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.P
The groff language as a whole is described in the (still incomplete)
.IR "groff info file" ;
a short (but complete) reference can be found in
.BR groff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Formatters
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The central roff formatter within the groff system is
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@).
It provides the features of both the classical troff and nroff, as
well as the groff extensions.
.
The command line option
.ShortOpt C
switches
.B @g@troff
into
.I "compatibility mode"
which tries to emulate classical roff as much as possible.
.
.P
There is a shell script
.BR @g@nroff (@MAN1EXT@)
that emulates the behavior of classical nroff.
.
It tries to automatically select the proper output encoding, according to
the current locale.
.
.P
The formatter program generates
.IR "intermediate output" ;
see
.BR \%groff_out (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Devices
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
In roff, the output targets are called
.IR devices .
A device can be a piece of hardware, e.g. a printer, or a software
file format.
.
A device is specified by the option
.ShortOpt T .
The groff devices are as follows.
.
.TP
.B ascii
Text output using the
.BR ascii (7)
character set.
.
.TP
.B cp1047
Text output using the EBCDIC code page IBM cp1047 (e.g. OS/390 Unix).
.
.TP
.B dvi
TeX DVI format.
.
.TP
.B html
HTML output.
.
.TP
.B latin1
Text output using the ISO \%Latin-1 (ISO \%8859-1) character set; see
.BR \%iso_8859_1 (7).
.
.TP
.B koi8-r
Text output using the Russian KOI8-R character set.
.
.TP
.B lbp
Output for Canon CAPSL printers (\%LBP-4 and \%LBP-8 series laser printers).
.
.TP 
.B lj4
HP LaserJet4-compatible (or other PCL5-compatible) printers.
.
.TP
.B ps
PostScript output; suitable for printers and previewers like
.BR gv (1).
.
.TP
.B utf8
Text output using the Unicode (ISO 10646) character set with \%UTF-8
encoding; see
.BR unicode (7).
.
.TP
.B X75
75dpi X Window System output suitable for the previewers
.BR xditview (1x)
and
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
A variant for a 12\|pt document base font is
.BR \%X75-12 .
.
.TP
.B X100
100dpi X Window System output suitable for the previewers
.BR xditview (1x)
and
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@).
A variant for a 12\|pt document base font is
.BR \%X100-12 .
.
.P
The postprocessor to be used for a device is specified by the
.B postpro
command in the device description file; see
.BR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
.
This can be overridden with the
.B \*[@-]X
option.
.
.P
The default device is
.BR @DEVICE@ .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Postprocessors
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
groff provides 3\~hardware postprocessors:
.
.TP
.BR \%grolbp (@MAN1EXT@)
for some Canon printers,
.TP
.BR \%grolj4 (@MAN1EXT@)
for printers compatible to the HP LaserJet\~4 and PCL5,
.TP
.BR \%grotty (@MAN1EXT@)
for text output using various encodings, e.g. on text-oriented
terminals or line-printers.
.
.P
Today, most printing or drawing hardware is handled by the operating
system, by device drivers, or by software interfaces, usually accepting
PostScript.
.
Consequently, there isn't an urgent need for more hardware device
postprocessors.
.
.P
The groff software devices for conversion into other document file
formats are
.
.TP
.BR \%grodvi (@MAN1EXT@)
for the DVI format,
.TP
.BR \%grohtml (@MAN1EXT@)
for HTML format,
.TP
.BR grops (@MAN1EXT@)
for PostScript.
.
.P
Combined with the many existing free conversion tools this should
be sufficient to convert a troff document into virtually any existing
data format.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS Utilities
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The following utility programs around groff are available.
.
.TP
.BR \%addftinfo (@MAN1EXT@)
Add information to troff font description files for use with groff.
.
.TP
.BR \%afmtodit (@MAN1EXT@)
Create font description files for PostScript device.
.
.TP
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@)
General viewer program for groff files and man pages.
.
.TP
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@)
The groff X viewer, the GNU version of xditview.
.
.TP
.BR \%hpftodit (@MAN1EXT@)
Create font description files for lj4 device.
.
.TP
.BR \%indxbib (@MAN1EXT@)
Make inverted index for bibliographic databases.
.
.TP
.BR lkbib (@MAN1EXT@)
Search bibliographic databases.
.
.TP
.BR \%lookbib (@MAN1EXT@)
Interactively search bibliographic databases.
.
.TP
.BR \%pfbtops (@MAN1EXT@)
Translate a PostScript font in .pfb format to ASCII.
.
.TP
.BR \%tfmtodit (@MAN1EXT@)
Create font description files for TeX DVI device.
.
.TP
.BR \%xditview (1x)
roff viewer distributed with X window.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Normally, the path separator in the following environment variables is the
colon; this may vary depending on the operating system.
.
For example, DOS and Windows use a semicolon instead.
.
.TP
.EnvVar GROFF_BIN_PATH
This search path, followed by
.EnvVar $PATH ,
will be used for commands that are executed by
.BR groff .
.
If it is not set then the directory where the groff binaries were
installed is prepended to
.EnvVar PATH .
.
.TP
.EnvVar GROFF_COMMAND_PREFIX
When there is a need to run different roff implementations at the same
time
.I groff
provides the facility to prepend a prefix to most of its programs that
could provoke name clashings at run time (default is to have none).
.
Historically, this prefix was the character
.BR g ,
but it can be anything.
.
For example,
.BR gtroff
stood for
.IR groff 's
.BR troff ,
.BR gtbl
for the
.I groff
version of
.BR tbl .
.
By setting
.EnvVar GROFF_COMMAND_PREFIX
to different values, the different roff installations can be
addressed.
.
More exactly, if it is set to prefix
.I xxx
then
.B groff
as a wrapper program will internally call
.IB xxx troff
instead of
.BR troff .
This also applies to the preprocessors
.BR \%eqn ,
.BR \%grn ,
.BR \%pic ,
.BR \%refer ,
.BR \%tbl ,
.BR \%soelim ,
and to the utilities
.B \%@g@indxbib
and
.BR \%@g@lookbib .
.
This feature does not apply to any programs different from the ones
above (most notably
.B groff
itself) since they are unique to the groff package.
.
.
.TP
.EnvVar GROFF_FONT_PATH
A list of directories in which to search for the
.BI dev name
directory in addition to the default ones.
.
See
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.BR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)
for more details.
.
.
.TP
.EnvVar GROFF_TMAC_PATH
A list of directories in which to search for macro files in addition to
the default directories.
.
See
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@)
and
.BR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@)
for more details.
.
.
.TP
.EnvVar GROFF_TMPDIR
The directory in which temporary files will be created.
.
If this is not set but the environment variable
.EnvVar TMPDIR
instead, temporary files will be created in the directory
.EnvVar $TMPDIR .
.
Otherwise temporary files will be created in
.BR /tmp .
The
.BR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%grohtml (@MAN1EXT@),
and
.BR grops (@MAN1EXT@)
commands use temporary files.
.
.
.TP
.EnvVar GROFF_TYPESETTER
Preset the default device.
.
If this is not set the
.B @DEVICE@
device is used as default.
.
This device name is overwritten by the option
.ShortOpt T .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FILES
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
There are some directories in which
.I groff
installs all of its data files.
.
Due to different installation habits on different operating systems,
their locations are not absolutely fixed, but their function is
clearly defined and coincides on all systems.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "groff Macro Directory"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
This contains all information related to macro packages.
.
Note that more than a single directory is searched for those files
as documented in
.BR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@).
.
For the groff installation corresponding to this document, it is
located at
.IR @MACRODIR@ .
.
The following files contained in the
.I groff macro directory
have a special meaning:
.
.
.TP
.B troffrc
Initialization file for troff.
.
This is interpreted by
.B @g@troff
before reading the macro sets and any input.
.
.
.TP
.B troffrc-end
Final startup file for troff, it is parsed after all macro sets have
been read.
.
.
.TP
.IB name .tmac
.TP+
.BI tmac. name
Macro file for macro package
.IR name .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SS "groff Font Directory"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
This contains all information related to output devices.
.
Note that more than a single directory is searched for those files; see
.BR @g@troff (@MAN1EXT@).
.
For the groff installation corresponding to this document, it is
located at
.IR @FONTDIR@ .
.
The following files contained in the
.I groff font directory
have a special meaning:
.
.
.TP
.BI dev name /DESC
Device description file for device
.IR name ,
see
.BR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.
.TP
.BI dev name / F
Font file for font
.I F
of device
.IR name .
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH EXAMPLES
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The following example illustrates the power of the
.B groff
program as a wrapper around
.BR @g@troff .
.
.P
To process a roff file using the preprocessors
.B tbl
and
.B pic
and the
.B me
macro set, classical troff had to be called by
.
.P
.ShellCommand pic foo.me | tbl | troff \*[@-]me \*[@-]Tlatin1 | grotty
.
.P
Using
.BR groff ,
this pipe can be shortened to the equivalent command
.P
.ShellCommand groff \*[@-]p \*[@-]t \*[@-]me \*[@-]T latin1 foo.me
.
.P
An even easier way to call this is to use
.BR grog (@MAN1EXT@)
to guess the preprocessor and macro options and execute the generated
command (by using backquotes to specify shell command substitution)
.P
.ShellCommand \`grog \*[@-]Tlatin1 foo.me\`
.
.P
The simplest way is to view the contents in an automated way by
calling
.
.P
.ShellCommand groffer foo.me
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.P
On EBCDIC hosts (e.g. OS/390 Unix), output devices
.B ascii
and
.B latin1
aren't available.
.
Similarly, output for EBCDIC code page
.B cp1047
is not available on ASCII based operating systems.
.
.P
Report bugs to bug-groff@gnu.org.
.
Include a complete, self-contained example that will allow the bug to
be reproduced, and say which version of groff you are using.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AVAILABILITY
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Information on how to get groff and related information is available
at the
.URL http://\:www.gnu.org/\:software/\:groff "GNU website" .
The most recent released version of groff is available for anonymous
ftp at the
.URL ftp://ftp.ffii.org/\:pub/\:groff/\:devel/\:groff-current.tar.gz \
     "groff development site" .
.
.P
Three groff mailing lists are available:
.TP
.MTO bug-groff@gnu.org
for reporting bugs,
.
.TP
.MTO groff@gnu.org
for general discussion of groff,
.
.TP
.MTO groff-commit@ffii.org
a read-only list showing logs of commitments to the CVS repository.
.
.P
Details on CVS access and much more can be found in the file
.B README
at the top directory of the groff source package.
.
.P
There is a free implementation of the
.B grap
preprocessor, written by
.MTO faber@lunabase.org " Ted Faber" .
.
The actual version can be found at the
.
.URL http://\:www.lunabase.org/\:~faber/\:Vault/\:software/\:grap/ \
     "grap website" .
This is the only grap version supported by groff.
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH AUTHORS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
Copyright \(co 1989, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.
.P
This document is distributed under the terms of the FDL (GNU Free
Documentation License) version 1.1 or later.
.
You should have received a copy of the FDL on your system, it is also
available on-line at the
.URL http://\:www.gnu.org/\:copyleft/\:fdl.html "GNU copyleft site" .
.
.P
This document is based on the original groff man page written by
.MTO jjc@jclark.com "James Clark" .
.
It was rewritten, enhanced, and put under the FDL license by
.MTO bwarken@mayn.de "Bernd Warken" .
.
It is maintained by
.MTO wl@gnu.org "Werner Lemberg" .
.
.P
.I groff
is a GNU free software project.
.
All parts of the
.I groff package
are protected by GNU copyleft licenses.
.
The software files are distributed under the terms of the GNU General
Public License (GPL), while the documentation files mostly use the GNU
Free Documentation License (FDL).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
The
.IR "groff info file"
contains all information on the groff system within a single document.
.
Beneath the detailed documentation of all aspects, it provides
examples and background information.
.
See
.BR info (1)
on how to read it.
.
.P
Due to its complex structure, the groff system has many man pages.
.
They can be read with
.BR man (1)
or
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.TP
Introduction, history and further readings:
.BR roff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.TP
Viewer for groff files:
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%xditview (1x).
.
.TP
Wrapper programs for formatters:
.BR \%groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%grog (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.TP
Roff preprocessors:
.BR \%@g@eqn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@grn (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@pic (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@refer (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@soelim (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@tbl (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR grap (1).
.
.TP
Roff language with the groff extensions:
.BR \%groff (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_char (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_diff (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_font (@MAN5EXT@).
.
.TP
Roff formatter programs:
.BR \%@g@nroff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@troff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR ditroff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.TP
The intermediate output language:
.BR \%groff_out (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.TP
Postprocessors for the output devices:
.BR \%grodvi (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%grohtml (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%grolbp (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%grolj4 (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%grops (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%grotty (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.TP
Groff macro packages and macro-specific utilities:
.BR \%groff_tmac (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR \%groff_man (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_mdoc (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_me (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_mm (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_mmse (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_mom (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_ms (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_www (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%groff_trace (@MAN7EXT@),
.BR \%mmroff (@MAN7EXT@).
.
.TP
The following utilities are available:
.BR \%addftinfo (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%afmtodit (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%eqn2graph (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%groffer (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%gxditview (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%hpftodit (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@indxbib (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%@g@lookbib (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%pfbtops (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%pic2graph (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR \%tfmtodit (@MAN1EXT@).
.
.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.\" Emacs setup
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
