.TH j_syscolors.d 1m   "$Date:: 2007-10-03 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
j_syscolors.d - trace Java method flow plus syscalls, in color.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B j_syscolors.d
{ \-p PID | \-c cmd }	
.SH DESCRIPTION
This traces Java methods if the hotspot provider exists (1.6.0) and
the flag "+ExtendedDTraceProbes" is used. eg,
java -XX:+ExtendedDTraceProbes classfile

This watches Java method entries and returns, and indents child
method calls.

If the flow appears to jump, check the TID column - the JVM may have
switched to another thread.
.SH OS
Solaris
.SH STABILITY
Evolving - uses the DTrace hotspot provider, which may change 
as additional features are introduced. Check Java/Readme
to see what version these scripts are based on.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output,
# 
.B j_syscolors.d
.PP
.SH FIELDS
.TP
C
CPU-id
.TP
PID
Process ID
.TP
TID
Thread ID
.TP
DELTA(us)
Elapsed time from previous line to this line
.TP
TYPE
Type of call (func/syscall)
.TP
NAME
Java method or syscall name
.SH WARNING
Watch the first column carefully, it prints the CPU-id. If it
changes, then it is very likely that the output has been shuffled.
Changes in TID will appear to shuffle output, as we change from one thread
depth to the next. See Docs/Notes/ALLjavaflow.txt for additional notes.
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Examples, Notes and Docs directories. The example files may be
especially useful as they aim to demonstrate how to interpret
the output.
.SH EXIT
j_syscolors.d will run until Ctrl-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[CA, USA]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)
