.TH py_profile.d 1m   "$Date:: 2007-10-03 #$" "USER COMMANDS"
.SH NAME
py_profile.d - sample stack traces with Python translations using DTrace.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B py_profile.d
{ \-p PID | \-c cmd }	
.SH DESCRIPTION
This samples stack traces for the process specified. This stack trace
will cross the Python engine and system libraries, and insert 
translations for Python stack frames where appropriate. This is best
explained with an example stack frame output,

libpython2.4.so.1.0`PyEval_EvalFrame+0x2fbf
[ ./func_loop.py:5 (func_c) ]
libpython2.4.so.1.0`fast_function+0xa8
libpython2.4.so.1.0`call_function+0xda
libpython2.4.so.1.0`PyEval_EvalFrame+0xbdf
[ ./func_loop.py:11 (func_b) ]
libpython2.4.so.1.0`fast_function+0xa8
libpython2.4.so.1.0`call_function+0xda
libpython2.4.so.1.0`PyEval_EvalFrame+0xbdf
[ ./func_loop.py:14 (func_a) ]
libpython2.4.so.1.0`fast_function+0xa8
libpython2.4.so.1.0`call_function+0xda
libpython2.4.so.1.0`PyEval_EvalFrame+0xbdf
[ ./func_loop.py:16 (?) ]

The lines in square brackets are the native Python frames, the rest
are the Python engine.
.SH OS
Any
.SH STABILITY
Evolving - uses the DTrace Python provider, which may change 
as additional features are introduced. Check Python/Readme
to see what version these scripts are based on.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Default output,
# 
.B py_profile.d
.PP
.PP
.SH DOCUMENTATION
See the DTraceToolkit for further documentation under the 
Examples, Notes and Docs directories. The example files may be
especially useful as they aim to demonstrate how to interpret
the output.
.SH EXIT
py_profile.d will run until Ctrl-C is hit.
.SH AUTHOR
Brendan Gregg
[CA, USA]
.SH SEE ALSO
dtrace(1M)
