.tr ~
.ig
Copyright (C) 1994-2000, 2001, 2003, 2004 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
manual into another language, under the above conditions for modified
versions, except that this permission notice may be included in
translations approved by the Free Software Foundation instead of in
the original English.
..
.\" Like TP, but if specified indent is more than half
.\" the current line-length - indent, use the default indent.
.de Tp
.ie \\n(.$=0:((0\\$1)*2u>(\\n(.lu-\\n(.iu)) .TP
.el .TP "\\$1"
..
.de CW
.ie \\n(.$>2 \&\\$1\f(CR\\$2\fP\\$3
.el \&\f(CR\\$1\fP\\$2
..
.tr ~
.TH HPFTODIT @MAN1EXT@ "@MDATE@" "Groff Version @VERSION@"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH NAME
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
hpftodit \- create font description files for use with groff \-Tlj4
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.B hpftodit
[
.B \-adqsv
]
[
.BI \-i n
]
.I tfm_file
.I map_file
.I font
.PP
It is possible to have whitespace between the
.B \-i
option and its parameter.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.B hpftodit
creates a font file for use with a Hewlett-Packard LaserJet~4\(enseries
(or newer) printer with
.BR "groff \-Tlj4" ,
using data from an HP tagged font metric (TFM) file.
.I tfm_file
is the name of the TFM file for the font; Intellifont and
TrueType TFM files are supported, but symbol set TFM files are not.
.I map_file
is a file giving the groff names for characters in the font; this file
should consist of a sequence of lines of the form:
.IP
.I
m u c1 c2 \fR.\|.\|. [ 
.CW #
.I comment
]
.LP
where
.I m
is a decimal integer giving the MSL number of the character,
.I u
is a hexadecimal integer giving the Unicode value of the character,
and
.IR c1 ,
.IR c2 ", .\|.\|."
are the groff names of the character.
The values can be separated by any whitespace; the Unicode value must
use uppercase digits A\^\(en\^F, and must be without a leading
.CW ` 0x ',
.CW ` u ',
or
.CW ` U+ '.
Unicode values corresponding to composite glyphs are decomposed; e.g.,
.CW ` u00C0 '
becomes
.CW ` u0041_0300 '.
The name for a glyph without a groff name may be given as
.CW u \fIXXXX\fP
if the glyph corresponds to a Unicode value, or as an unnamed glyph
.CW ` --- '.
If the given Unicode value is in the Private Use Area
(0xE000\^\(en\^0xF8FF), the glyph is included as an unnamed glyph.
Refer to
.BR groff_diff (@MAN1EXT@)
for additional information about unnamed glyphs and how to access them.
.LP
Blank lines and lines beginning with
.CW ` # '
are ignored.
A
.CW ` # '
following one or more groff names begins a comment.
Because
.CW ` # '
is a valid groff name, it must appear first in a list of
groff names if a comment is included, e.g.,
.IP
.CW "3   0023   #   # number sign"
.LP
or
.IP
.CW "3   0023   # sh   # number sign"
.LP
rather than
.IP
.CW "3   0023   sh #   # number sign"
.LP
which will treat the first
.CW ` # '
as the beginning of the comment.
.LP
.I font
is the name of the groff font file.
The groff font file is written to
.IR font ;
if
.I font
is specified as
.CW ` - ',
the output is written to the standard output.
.LP
The
.B \-s
option should be given if the font is special
(a font is
.I special
if
.B troff
should search it whenever
a character is not found in the current font).
If the font is special,
it should be listed in the
.B fonts
command in the DESC file;
if it is not special, there is no need to list it, since
.B troff
can automatically mount it when it's first used.
.LP
If the
.B \-i
option is used,
.B hpftodit
automatically will generate an italic correction,
a left italic correction and a subscript correction
for each character
(the significance of these parameters is explained in
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@)).
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-a
Include characters in the TFM file that are not included in the map
file.
A glyph with corresponding Unicode value is given the name
.RI u XXXX ;
a glyph without a Unicode value is included as an unnamed glyph
\&`\-\^\-\^\-'.
A glyph with a Unicode value in the Private Use Area
(0xE000\^\(en\^0xF8FF) also is included as an unnamed glyph.
.IP
This option provides a simple means of adding Unicode-named and unnamed
glyphs to a font without including them in the map file, but it affords
little control over which glyphs are placed in a regular font and which
are placed in a special font.
The presence or absence of the
.B \-s
option has some effect on which glyphs are included: without the
.B \-s
option, only the \(lqtext\(rq symbol sets are searched for matching
glyphs; with the
.B \-s
option, only the \(lqmathematical\(rq symbol sets
are searched.
Nonetheless, restricting the symbol sets searched isn't very
selective\(emmany glyphs are placed in both regular and special fonts.
Normally, the
.B \-a
option should be used only as a last resort.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-d
Dump information about the TFM file to the standard output; this option
can be useful for ensuring that a TFM file is a proper match for a font,
and that the contents of the TFM file are suitable.
The information includes the values of important TFM tags, and a listing
(by MSL number for Intellifont TFM files or by Unicode value for
TrueType TFM files) of the glyphs included in the TFM file.
The unit of measure `DU' for some tags indicates design units; there are
8782 design units per em for Intellifont fonts, and 2048 design units
per em for TrueType fonts.
Note that the accessibility of a glyph depends on its inclusion in a
symbol set; some TFM files list many glyphs but only a few symbol sets.
.IP
The glyph listing includes the glyph index within the TFM file, the MSL
or Unicode value, and the symbol set and character code that will be
used to print the glyph.
If
.I map_file
is given,
groff names are given for matching glyphs.
If only the glyph index and MSL or Unicode value are given, the glyph
does not appear in any supported symbol set and cannot be printed.
.IP
With the
.B \-d
option,
.I map_file
is optional, and
.I font
is ignored if given.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-q
Suppress warnings about characters in the map file that were not found
in the TFM file.
Warnings never are given for unnamed glyphs or by glyphs named by their
Unicode values.
This option is useful when sending the output of
.B hpftodit
to the standard output.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-v
Print the
.B hpftodit
version number.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.B \-s
The font is special.
This option adds the
.B special
command to the font file, and affects the order in which HP symbol sets
are searched for each glyph.
Without the
.B \-s
option, the \(lqtext\(rq sets are searched before
the \(lqmathematical\(rq symbol sets.
With the
.B \-s
option, the search order is reversed.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.TP
.BI \-i n
Generate an italic correction for each character so that the character's
width plus the character's italic correction is equal to
.I n
thousandths of an em plus the amount by which the right edge of the
character's bounding is to the right of the character's origin.
If this would result in a negative italic correction, use a zero italic
correction instead.
.IP
Also generate a subscript correction equal to the 
product of the tangent of the slant of the font and
four fifths of the x-height of the font.
If this would result in a subscript correction greater than the italic
correction, use a subscript correction equal to the italic correction
instead.
.IP
Also generate a left italic correction for each character
equal to
.I n
thousandths of an em plus the amount by which the left edge of the
character's bounding box is to the left of the character's origin.
The left italic correction may be negative.
.IP
This option normally is needed only with italic or oblique fonts;
a value of 50 (0.05 em) usually is a reasonable choice.
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH FILES
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.ad 0
.TP \w'\fB@FONTDIR@/devlj4/generate/\fP\fI*\fP.map'u+2n
.B @FONTDIR@/devlj4/DESC
Device description file.
.TP
.BI @FONTDIR@/devlj4/ F
Font description file for font
.IR F .
.TP
.BI @FONTDIR@/devlj4/generate/ * .map
Symbol mapping files
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.\" --------------------------------------------------------------------------
.BR groff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff_diff (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR grolj4 (@MAN1EXT@),
.BR groff_font (@MAN5EXT@),
.BR lj4_font (@MAN5EXT@)
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
