.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Whistle Communications, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\" 
.\" Subject to the following obligations and disclaimer of warranty, use and
.\" redistribution of this software, in source or object code forms, with or
.\" without modifications are expressly permitted by Whistle Communications;
.\" provided, however, that:
.\" 1. Any and all reproductions of the source or object code must include the
.\"    copyright notice above and the following disclaimer of warranties; and
.\" 2. No rights are granted, in any manner or form, to use Whistle
.\"    Communications, Inc. trademarks, including the mark "WHISTLE
.\"    COMMUNICATIONS" on advertising, endorsements, or otherwise except as
.\"    such appears in the above copyright notice or in the software.
.\" 
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS BEING PROVIDED BY WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS "AS IS", AND
.\" TO THE MAXIMUM EXTENT PERMITTED BY LAW, WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS MAKES NO
.\" REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, REGARDING THIS SOFTWARE,
.\" INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY AND ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
.\" MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, OR NON-INFRINGEMENT.
.\" WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS DOES NOT WARRANT, GUARANTEE, OR MAKE ANY
.\" REPRESENTATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF, OR THE RESULTS OF THE USE OF THIS
.\" SOFTWARE IN TERMS OF ITS CORRECTNESS, ACCURACY, RELIABILITY OR OTHERWISE.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DAMAGES
.\" RESULTING FROM OR ARISING OUT OF ANY USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, INCLUDING
.\" WITHOUT LIMITATION, ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY,
.\" PUNITIVE, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES, LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, HOWEVER CAUSED AND UNDER ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF WHISTLE COMMUNICATIONS IS ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY
.\" OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\" 
.\" Author: Archie Cobbs <archie@whistle.com>
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 25, 2000
.Dt NG_ETHER 8
.Os FreeBSD
.Sh NAME
.Nm ng_ether
.Nd Ethernet netgraph node type
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <netgraph/ng_ether.h>
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm ether
netgraph node type allows Ethernet interfaces to interact with
the
.Xr netgraph 4 
networking subsystem.  The kernel must be compiled with
.Bd -literal
    options NETGRAPH
.Ed
.Pp
for this functionality to be enabled.
This causes a netgraph node to be automatically created for each Ethernet
interface in the system.  The node will have a name equal to
the name of the interface, and it will be persistent.
.Pp
The Ethernet interface continues to function normally until a connection
is made to one of the two supported hooks,
.Dv orphans
or
.Dv divert .
The
.Dv orphans
hook is used to receive Ethernet frames received by the device and
having an unknown or unsupported Ethertype.
The
.Dv divert
hook is used to divert
.Em all
Ethernet frames received by the device; the interface will otherwise
appear to go silent until this hook is disconnected.
.Pp
Either hook may be used to transmit Ethernet frames by transmitting packets
to the hook.  In all cases, frames are raw Ethernet frames with the standard
14 byte Ethernet header (but no checksum).
.Sh HOOKS
This node type supports the following hooks:
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width orphans
.It Dv orphans
This hook transmits Ethernet frames received by the device and
having an unknown or unsupported Ethertype.  Frames received on
this hook are written as-is out on the wire.
.It Dv divert
When connected, this hook transmits all Ethernet frames received by the device.
Frames received on this hook are written as-is out on the wire.
.El
.Sh CONTROL MESSAGES
This node type supports only the generic control messages.
.Sh SHUTDOWN
This node is persistent.  Upon receipt of a
.Dv NGM_SHUTDOWN
control message, all hooks are disconnected.
.Sh EXAMPLE
This command will dump all packets received by the
.Dv fxp0
interface to standard output as decoded hex and ASCII:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nghook -a fxp0: divert
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr arp 4 ,
.Xr netgraph 4 ,
.Xr netintro 4 ,
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr nghook 8 ,
.Xr ngctl 8
.Sh AUTHOR
.An Julian Elischer Aq julian@FreeBSD.org
