.\" Copyright (c) 1990, 1991, 1993
.\"	The Regents of the University of California.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This code is derived from software contributed to Berkeley by
.\" Chris Torek.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. Neither the name of the University nor the names of its contributors
.\"    may be used to endorse or promote products derived from this software
.\"    without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE REGENTS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd June 19, 2026
.Dt BCOPY 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bcopy
.Nd copy bytes in object
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/systm.h
.Ft void
.Fn bcopy "const void *src" "void *dst" "size_t len"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn bcopy
function copies
.Fa len
bytes from object
.Fa src
to object
.Fa dst .
The two objects may overlap.
If
.Fa len
is zero, no bytes are copied.
.Pp
The
.Fn bcopy
function is deprecated and
.Fn memcpy
or
.Fn memmove
should be used as appropriate in new code.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr memcpy 9 ,
.Xr memmove 9
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Fn bcopy
function appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
.Pp
.St -p1003.1-2008
removes the specification of
.Fn bcopy
and it is marked as LEGACY in
.St -p1003.1-2004 .
New programs should use
.Xr memmove 3 .
If the input and output buffer do not overlap, then
.Xr memcpy 3
is more efficient.
Note that
.Fn bcopy
takes
.Ar src
and
.Ar dst
in the opposite order from
.Fn memmove
and
.Fn memcpy .
In practice,
.In sys/systm.h
defines
.Fn bcopy
as a macro that calls
.Fn memmove
since
.Fx 12.0 .
