.\" -
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Semihalf
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 18, 2022
.Dt BUS_GET_PROPERTY 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm BUS_GET_PROPERTY
.Nd get child's specific property
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Ft ssize_t
.Fn BUS_GET_PROPERTY "device_t dev" "device_t child" "const char *propname" \
    "void *propvalue" "size_t size" "device_property_type_t type"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn BUS_GET_PROPERTY
method
is called from driver code which wants to access a child's specific data stored
on the bus.
A property has a name and an associated value.
Implementation shall copy to
.Fa propvalue
at most
.Fa size
bytes.
.Pp
.Fn BUS_GET_PROPERTY
supports different property types specified via the
.Fa type
argument.
The
.Fa size
is guaranteed to be a multiple of the underlying property type.
If a type is not supported,
.Fn BUS_GET_PROPERTY
shall return -1.
.Sh NOTES
If
.Fa propvalue
is NULL or
.Fa size
is zero, the implementation shall return only the size of the property.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The property size if successful, otherwise -1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr device_get_property 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bartlomiej Grzesik .
