.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 M. Warner Losh
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd March 29, 2003
.Dt BUS_SET_RESOURCE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bus_set_resource
.Nd Associates a definite resource with a given rid.
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Pp
.In machine/bus.h
.In sys/rman.h
.In machine/resource.h
.Ft int
.Fn bus_set_resource "device_t dev" "int type" "int rid" "u_long start" "u_long count"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Set the start address of the resource type, rid pair to be count long.
Typically client drivers do not use this interface.
Bus drivers, however, often use it to setup the resources a client
driver users.
.Pp
Its arguments are as follows:
.Bl -item
.It
.Fa dev
is the device to set the resource on.
.It
.Fa type
is the type of resource you want to allocate.
It is one of:
.Bl -tag -width SYS_RES_MEMORY
.It Dv SYS_RES_IRQ
for IRQs
.It Dv SYS_RES_DRQ
for ISA DMA lines
.It Dv SYS_RES_IOPORT
for I/O ports
.It Dv SYS_RES_MEMORY
for I/O memory
.El
.It
.Fa rid
points to a bus specific handle that identifies the resource being allocated.
.It
.Fa start
is the beginning address of this resource.
.It
.Fa count
is the length of the resource.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero indicates success.
Non-zero is an error from errno.h.
.\".Sh EXAMPLES
.\".Bd -literal
.\".Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bus_alloc_resource 9 ,
.Xr bus_get_resource 9 ,
.Xr device 9 ,
.Xr driver 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This man page was written by
.An Warner Losh Aq imp@FreeBSD.org .
