.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2008-2009 Lawrence Stewart <lstewart@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions, and the following disclaimer,
.\"    without modification, immediately at the beginning of the file.
.\" 2. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR
.\" ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 17, 2008
.Dt CC 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cc ,
.Nm DECLARE_CC_MODULE
.Nd Modular Congestion Control
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In netinet/cc.h
.In netinet/cc_module.h
.Fn DECLARE_CC_MODULE "name" "name_cc_algo"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
framework provides an interface to dynamically add/remove transport protocol
related congestion control algorithms to/from the running kernel.
.Pp
Congestion control algorithms are identified by an ASCII name and set of
hook function implementations encapsulated in a
.Vt "struct cc_algo" ,
which has the following members:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct cc_algo {
	char	name[TCP_CA_NAME_MAX];
	int	(*mod_init) (void);
	int	(*mod_destroy) (void);
	int	(*cb_init) (struct tcpcb *tp);
	void	(*cb_destroy) (struct tcpcb *tp);
	void	(*conn_init) (struct tcpcb *tp);
	void	(*ack_received) (struct tcpcb *tp, struct tcphdr *th);
	void	(*pre_fr) (struct tcpcb *tp, struct tcphdr *th);
	void	(*post_fr) (struct tcpcb *tp, struct tcphdr *th);
	void	(*after_idle) (struct tcpcb *tp);
	void	(*after_timeout) (struct tcpcb *tp);
};
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Va name
field identifies the unique name of the algorithm.
.Pp
The
.Va mod_init
function pointer is called by the framework when a new module is loaded into
the system.
It should be implemented if a module needs to set up some global state prior to
being available for use by new connections.
The
.Va mod_destroy
function pointer is called by the framework when an existing module is unloaded
from the system.
It should be implemented if a module needs to perform any cleanup activities
related to global state before being removed from the kernel.
.Ss Runtime Configuration
The following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables are available for tuning:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va net.inet.tcp.cc.available" -offset indent
.It Va net.inet.tcp.cc.available
Identifies the list of currently available congestion control algorithms by
name.
.El
.Bl -tag -width ".Va net.inet.tcp.cc.algorithm" -offset indent
.It Va net.inet.tcp.cc.algorithm
Specifies which congestion control algorithm will be used by default for new TCP
connections.
Setting this variable to one of the names in the
.Va net.inet.tcp.cc.available
list will change the system default for all new connections.
.El
.Sh FUNCTIONS
The
.Fn cc_register_algo
function registers the algorithm pointed to by
.Fa add_cc
with the framework.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn cc_register_algo
function returns non-zero on failure.
.Sh SEE ALSO

.\" Coming soon...
.\" .Xr cc_cubic 4 ,
.\" .Xr cc_htcp 4 ,
.Xr cc_newreno 4 ,
.Xr sctp 4
.Xr tcp 4 ,
.Sh HISTORY
The modular Congestion Control (CC) framework first appeared in
.Fx 8.0 .
.Sh FUTURE WORK
Integrate with
.Xr sctp 4 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
framework was written by
.An James Healy Aq jimmy@deefa.com
and
.An Lawrence Stewart Aq lstewart@FreeBSD.org
while working at the Centre for Advanced Internet Architectures,
Swinburne University (http://caia.swin.edu.au/).
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Lawrence Stewart Aq lstewart@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Development of this software was made possible in part by a grant from the
Cisco University Research Program Fund at Community Foundation Silicon Valley.
