.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2024 M. Warner Losh <imp@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause
.\"
.Dd July 20, 2024
.Dt CDEFS 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cdefs
.Nd compiler portability macro definitions
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.In sys/cdefs.h
defines macros for compiler, C language standard portability, POSIX standards
compliance and symbol visibility.
It defines programming interfaces for the system header files to adopt to the
many environments
.Fx
supports compilation for.
It defines convenience macros for the
.Fx
sources, tailored to the base
system's needs.
.Pp
Most of these macros are for use inside the
.Fx
sources only.
They are not intended as a general portability layer.
.Sh Supported Compilers
.Bl -tag -offset 2n -width 0
.It Compilers supported for building programs on Fx :
.Bl -column -offset 0n indent-two
.It Sy Compiler Ta Sy Versions
.It gcc Ta 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14
.It clang Ta 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18
.It TinyC (tcc) Ta 0.9
.It pcc Ta 1.1
.El
.Pp
Due to testing constraints, tcc and pcc may not always work.
.It Compilers supported for building Fx itself:
.Bl -column -offset 0n indent-two
.It Sy Compiler Ta Sy Major Versions Supported
.It gcc Ta 12, 13, 14
.It clang Ta 16, 17, 18
.El
.Pp
Please note: Not every single minor versions of these compilers
will work or are supported.
.Sh Macros and Magic for Programming Environment
.Nm
defines (or refrains from defining) a number of macros to increase portability
of compiled programs.
These are to allow more advanced language features to appear in header files.
The header files assume a compiler that accepts C prototype function
declarations.
They also assume that the compiler accepts ANSI C89 keywords for all language
dialects.
.Ss General Macros
General macros that facilitate multiple language environments and language
dialects.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy Macro Ta Sy Description
.It Dv __volatile Ta expands to volatile in C++ and C89 and newer environments,
__volatile in pre-ANSI environments that support this extension or nothing
otherwise.
.It Dv __inline Ta expands to inline in C++ and C89 and newer environments,
__inline in pre-ANSI environments that support this extension or nothing
otherwise.
.It Dv __restrict Ta expands to restrict in C99 and newer environments, or
__restrict otherwise.
.It Dv __CONCAT Ta used to paste two pre-processor tokens.
.It Dv __STRING Ta used to convert the argument to a string.
.It Dv __BEGIN_DECLS Ta Start a group of functions.
.It Dv __END_DECLS Ta End a group of functions.
In a C environment, these are defined as nothing.
In a C++ environment, these declare the functions to have
.Dq C
linkage.
.El
.Ss Function, Structure and Variable Modifiers
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy Macro Ta Sy Description
.It Sy __weak_symbol Ta Declare the symbol to be a weak symbol
.It Sy __dead2 Ta Function will not return
.It Sy __pure2 Ta Function has no side effects
.It Sy __unused Ta To Variable may be unused (usually arguments), so do not warn about it
.It Sy __used Ta Function really is used, so emit it even if it appears unused.
.It Sy __packed Ta \&Do not have space between structure elements for natural alignment.
Used when communicating with external protocols.
.It Sy __aligned(x) Ta Specify in bytes the minimum alignment for the specified field, structure or variable
.It Sy __section(x) Ta Place function or variable in section Fa x
.It Sy __writeonly Ta Hint that the variable is only assigned to, but do not warn about it.
Useful for macros and other places the eventual use of the result is unknown.
.It Sy __alloc_size(x) Ta The function always returns at least the number of
bytes determined by argument number Fa x
.It Sy __alloc_size2(x,n) Ta  The function always returns an array, whose size
is at least the number of bytes determined by argument number Fa x times the
number of elements specified by argument number Fa n
.It Sy __alloc_align(x) Ta Function either returns a pointer aligned to Fa x bytes
or Dv NULL.
.It Sy __min_size Ta Declare the array to have a certain, minimum size
.It Sy __malloc_like Ta Function behaves like the
.Dq malloc
family of functions.
.It Sy __pure Ta Function has no side effects
.It Sy __always_inline Ta Always inline this function when called
.It Sy __fastcall Ta Use the
.Dq fastcall
ABI to call and name mangle this function.
.It Sy __result_use_check Ta Warn if function caller does not use it's return value
.It Sy __result_use_or_ignore_check Ta Warn if function caller does not use it's return value.
Allows the value to be explicitly ignored with a (void) cast.
.It Sy __returns_twice Ta Returns multiple times, like
.Xr fork 2
.It Sy __unreachable Ta This code is not reachable at runtime
.It Sy __predict_true(x) Ta Hint to the compiler that
.Fa x
is true most of the time.
Should only be used when performance is improved for a frequently called bit of code.
.It Sy __predict_false(x) Ta Hint to the compiler that
.Fa x
is false most of the time.
Should only be used when performance is improved for a frequently called bit of code.
.It Sy __null_sentinel Ta The varadic function contains a parameter that is
a NULL sentinel to mark the end of its arguments.
.It Sy __exported Ta
.It Sy __hidden Ta
.It Sy __printflike(fmtarg,firstvararg) Ta Function is similar to
.Fn printf
which specifies the format argument with
.Fa fmtarg
and where the arguments formatted by that format start with the
.Fa firstvararg ,
with 0 meaning that
.Dv va_arg
is used and cannot be checked.
.It Sy __scanflike(fmtarg,firstvararg) Ta Function is similar to
.Fn scanf
which specifies the format argument with
.Fa fmtarg
and where the arguments formatted by that format start with the
.Fa firstvararg ,
with 0 meaning that
.Dv va_arg
is used and cannot be checked.
.It Sy __format_arg(f) Ta Specifies that arg
.Fa f
contains a string that will be passed to a function like
.Fn printf
or
.Fa scanf
after being translated in some way.
.It Sy __strfmonlike(fmtarg,firstvararg) Ta Function is similar to
.Fn scanf
which specifies the format argument with
.Fa fmtarg
and where the arguments formatted by that format start with the
.Fa firstvararg ,
with 0 meaning that
.Dv va_arg
is used and cannot be checked.
.It Sy __strtimelike(fmtarg,firstvararg) Ta Function is similar to
.Fn scanf
which specifies the format argument with
.Fa fmtarg
and where the arguments formatted by that format start with the
.Fa firstvararg ,
with 0 meaning that
.Dv va_arg
is used and cannot be checked.
.It Sy __printf0like(fmtarg,firstvararg) Ta Exactly the same
as
.Sy __printflike
except
.Fa fmtarg
may be
.Dv NULL.
.It Sy __strong_reference(sym,aliassym) Ta
.It Sy __weak_reference(sym,alias) Ta
.It Sy __warn_references(sym,msg) Ta
.It Sy __sym_compat(sym,impl,verid) Ta
.It Sy __sym_default(sym,impl,verid) Ta
.It Sy __GLOBAL(sym) Ta
.It Sy __WEAK(sym) Ta
.It Sy __DECONST(type,var) Ta
.It Sy __DEVOLATILE(type,var) Ta
.It Sy __DEQUALIFY(type,var) Ta
.It Sy __RENAME(x) Ta
.It Sy __arg_type_tag Ta
.It Sy __datatype_type_tag Ta
.It Sy __align_up(x,y) Ta
.It Sy __align_down(x,y) Ta
.It Sy __is_aligned(x,y) Ta
.El
.Ss Locking and Debugging Macros
Macros for lock annotation and debugging, as well as some general debugging
macros for address sanitizers.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy __lock_annotate(x) Ta
.It Sy __lockable Ta
.It Sy __locks_exclusive Ta
.It Sy __locks_shared Ta
.It Sy __trylocks_exclusive Ta
.It Sy __trylocks_shared Ta
.It Sy __unlocks Ta
.It Sy __asserts_exclusive Ta
.It Sy __asserts_shared Ta
.It Sy __requires_exclusive Ta
.It Sy __requires_shared Ta
.It Sy __requires_unlocked Ta
.It Sy __no_lock_analysis Ta
.It Sy __nosanitizeaddress Ta
.It Sy __nosanitizememory Ta
.It Sy __nosanitizethread Ta
.It Sy __nostackprotector Ta
.It Sy __guarded_by(x) Ta
.It Sy __pt_guarded_by(x) Ta
.El
.Ss Emulated Keywords
As C evolves, many of the old macros we once used have been incorporated into
the standard language.
As this happens, we add support for these keywords as macros for older
compilation environments.
Sometimes this results in a nop in the older environment.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy Keyword Ta Sy Description
.It Sy _Alignas(x) Ta
.It Sy _Alignof(x) Ta
.It Sy _Noreturn Ta Expands to
.Dq [[noreturn]]
in C++-11 and newer compilation environments, otherwise
.Dq __dead2
.It Sy _Static_assert(x, y) Ta Compile time assertion that
.Fa x
is true, otherwise emit
.Fa y
as the error message.
.It Sy _Thread_local Ta Designate variable as thread local storage
.It Sy __generic Ta implement _Generic-like features which aren't entirely possible to emulate the _Generic keyword
.It Sy __noexcept Ta to emulate the C++11 argument-less noexcept form
.It Sy __noexcept_if Ta to emulate the C++11 conditional noexcept form
.It Sy _Nonnull Ta
.It Sy _Nullable Ta
.It Sy _Null_unspecified Ta
.El
.Ss Support Macros
The following macros are defined, or have specific values, to denote certain
things about the build environment.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy Macro Ta Sy Description
.It Sy __LONG_LONG_SUPPORTED Ta Variables may be declared
.Dq long long .
This is defined for C99 or newer and C++ environments.
.It Sy __STDC_LIMIT_MACROS Ta
.It Sy __STDC_CONSTANT_MACROS Ta
.El
.Ss Convenience Macros
These macros make it easier to do a number of things, even though strictly
speaking the standard places their normal form in another header.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy Macro Ta Sy Description
.It Sy __offsetof(type,field) Ta
.It Sy __rangeof(type,start,end) Ta
.It Sy __containerof(x,s,m) Ta
.El
.Ss ID Strings
This section is deprecated, but is kept around because too much contrib software
still uses these.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy Macro Ta Sy Description
.It Sy __IDSTRING(name,string) Ta
.It Sy __FBSDID(s) Ta
.It Sy __RCSID(s) Ta
.It Sy __RCSID_SOURCE(s) Ta
.It Sy __SCCSID(s) Ta
.It Sy __COPYRIGHT(s) Ta
.El
.Sh Supported C Environments
.Fx
supports a number C standard environments.
Selection of the language dialect is a compiler-dependent command line option,
though it is usually
.Fl std=XX
where XX is the standard to set for compiling, such as c89 or c23.
.Fx
provides a number of selection macros to control visibility of symbols.
Please see the section on Selection Macros for the specifics.
.Pp
.Bl -tag
.It K \*(Am R
Pre-ANSI Kernighan and Ritchie C.
Sometimes called
.Dq knr
or
.Dq C78
to distinguish it from newer standards.
Support for this compilation environment is dependent on compilers supporting
this configuration.
Most of the old forms of C have been deprecated or removed in
ISO/IEC 9899:2024 (“ISO C23”).
Compilers make compiling in this mode increasingly difficult and support for it
may ultimately be removed from the tree.
.It St -ansiC
.Dv __STDC__
is defined, however
.Dv __STDC_VERSION__
is not.
.Pp
Strict environment selected with
.Dv _ANSI_SOURCE .
.It St -isoC-99
.Dv __STDC_VERSION__ = 199901L
.Pp
Strict environment selected with
.Dv _C99_SOURCE .
.It St -isoC-2011
.Dv __STDC_VERSION__ = 201112L
.Pp
Strict environment selected with
.Dv _C11_SOURCE .
.It ISO/IEC 9899:2018 (“ISO C17”)
.Dv __STDC_VERSION__ = 201710L
.Pp
Strict environment selected with
.Dv _C11_SOURCE
since there are no new C17 only symbols or macros.
.Pp
This version of the standard did not introduce any new features, only made
minor, technical corrections.
.It ISO/IEC 9899:2024 (“ISO C23”)
.Dv __STDC_VERSION__ = 202311L
Strict environment selected with
.Dv _C23_SOURCE
though this is not yet implemented.
.El
.Pp
For more information on C standards, see
.Xr c 7 .
.Ss Programming Environment Selection Macros
Defining the macros outlined below requests that the system header files provide
only the functions, structures and macros (symbols) defined by the appropriate
standard, while suppressing all extensions.
However, system headers not defined by that standard may define extensions.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Sy Macro Ta Sy Environment
.It Dv _POSIX_SOURCE Ta St -p1003.1-88 including St -ansiC
.It Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE = 1 Ta St -p1003.1-88 including St -ansiC
.It Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE = 2 Ta St -p1003.1-90 including St -ansiC
.It Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE = 199309 Ta St -p1003.1b-93 including St -ansiC
.It Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE = 199506 Ta St -p1003.1c-95 including St -ansiC
.It Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE = 200112 Ta St -p1003.1-2001 including St -isoC-99
.It Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE = 200809 Ta St -p1003.1-2008 including St -isoC-99
.It Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE = 202405 Ta in the future IEEE Std 1003.1-2024 (“POSIX.1”) including ISO/IEC 9899:2024 (“ISO C23”)
.It Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE = 500 Ta St -p1003.1c-95 and XPG extensions to St -susv2 including St -ansiC
.It Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE = 600 Ta St -p1003.1-2001 and XPG extensions to St -susv3 including St -isoC-99
.It Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE = 700 Ta St -p1003.1-2008 and XPG extensions to St -susv4 including St -isoC-99
.It Dv _XOPEN_SOURCE = 800 Ta in the future IEEE Std 1003.1-2024 (“POSIX.1”) and XPG extensions to Version 5 of the Single UNIX Specification (“SUSv5”) including ISO/IEC 9899:2024 (“ISO C23”)
.It Dv _ANSI_SOURCE Ta St -ansiC
.It Dv _C99_SOURCE Ta St -isoC-99
.It Dv _C11_SOURCE Ta St -isoC-2011
.It Dv _C23_SOURCE Ta in the future ISO/IEC 9899:2024 (“ISO C23”)
.It Dv _BSD_SOURCE Ta Everything, including Fx extensions
.El
.Pp
When both POSIX and C environments are selected, the POSIX environment selects
which C environment is used.
However, when C11 dialect is selected with
.St -p1003.1-2008 ,
definitions for
.St -isoC-2011
are included.
.Ss Header Visibility Macros
These macros are set by
.Nm
to control the visibility of different standards.
Users should not use these, but they are documented here for developers.
.Bl -column "---------------"
.It Dv __XSI_VISIBLE Ta Restricts the visibility of XOPEN Single Unix Standard version.
Possible values are 500, 600, 700 or 800, corresponding to Issue 5, 6, 7, or 8
of the Single Unix Standard.
These are extra functions in addition to the normal POSIX ones.
.It Dv __POSIX_VISIBLE Ta Make symbols associated with certain standards versions visible.
Set to the value assigned to
.Dv _POSIX_C_SOURCE
by convention with 199009 for
.St -p1003.1-88
and 199209
.St -p1003.1-90 .
.It Dv __ISO_C_VISIBLE Ta The C level that's visible.
Possible values include 1990, 1999, and 2011 for
.St -isoC-90 ,
.St -isoC-99
and
.St -isoC-2011
respectively.
In the future, 2023 will be used for ISO C2023.
.It Dv __BSD_VISIBLE Ta 1 if the
.Fx
extensions are visible, 0 otherwise.
.It Dv __EXT1_VISIBLE Ta 1 if the
.St -isoC-2011
Appendix K 3.7.4.1
extensions are visible, 0 otherwise.
.El
.Sh Supported C++ Environments
.Fx
supports C++11 and newer standards fully.
.Bl -tag
.It ISO/IEC 14882:1998 ("C++98")
.Dv __cplusplus = 199711
.Pp
The first standardized version of C++.
Unlike K \*(Am R support in C, compilers dropped support for versions of
the language prior to C++98.
.It ISO/IEC 14882:2003 ("C++03")
.Dv __cplusplus = 199711
.Pp
Note, this is the same value as C++98.
C++03 did not define a new value for
.Dv __cplusplus .
There is no way, at compile time, to detect the difference.
The standard resolved a number of defect reports and slightly
expanded value initialization.
Most compilers support it the same as C++98.
.It ISO/IEC 14882:2011 ("C++11")
.Dv __cplusplus = 201103
.It ISO/IEC 14882:2014 ("C++14")
.Dv __cplusplus = 201402
.It ISO/IEC 14882:2017 ("C++17")
.Dv __cplusplus = 201703
.It ISO/IEC 14882:2020 ("C++20")
.Dv __cplusplus = 202002
.It ISO/IEC 14882:2023 ("C++23")
.Dv __cplusplus = 202302
.El
.Pp
.Fx
uses llvm project's libc++.
However, they are removing support for C++ prior to C++11.
While programs can still build with earlier environments for now, these changes
mean that
.Fl pedantic-errors
cannot be reliably enabled for standards older than C++11.
.Sh HISTORY
.In sys/cdefs.h
first appeared in
.Bx 4.3 NET/2 .
