.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Joseph Koshy
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY JOSEPH KOSHY AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS''
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED
.\" TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
.\" PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE REGENTS OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd August 10, 2004
.Dt CONTIGMALLOC 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm contigmalloc , contigfree
.Nd manage contiguous kernel physical memory
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/malloc.h
.Ft "void *"
.Fo contigmalloc
.Fa "unsigned long size"
.Fa "struct malloc_type *type"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fa "vm_paddr_t low"
.Fa "vm_paddr_t high"
.Fa "unsigned long alignment"
.Fa "unsigned long boundary"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo contigfree
.Fa "void *addr"
.Fa "unsigned long size"
.Fa "struct malloc_type *type"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn contigmalloc
function allocates
.Fa size
bytes of contiguous physical memory that is aligned to
.Fa alignment
bytes, and which does not cross a boundary of
.Fa boundary
bytes.
If successful, the allocation will reside between physical addresses
.Fa low
and
.Fa high .
The returned pointer points to a wired kernel virtual
address range of
.Fa size
bytes allocated from the kernel virtual address (KVA) map.
.Pp
The
.Fa flags
parameter modifies
.Fn contigmalloc Ns 's
behaviour as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Dv M_ZERO
Causes the allocated physical memory to be zero filled.
.El
Other flags (if present) are ignored.
.Pp
The
.Fn contigfree
function deallocates memory allocated by a previous call to
.Fn contigmalloc .
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The
.Fn contigmalloc
function does not sleep waiting for memory resources to be freed up,
but instead scans available physical memory a small number of times
for a suitably sized free address range before giving up.
Memory allocation is done on a first-fit basis, starting from the
top of the provided address range.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn contigmalloc
function returns a kernel virtual address if allocation succeeds,
or
.Dv NULL
otherwise.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal
void *p;
p = contigmalloc(8192, M_DEVBUF, M_ZERO, 0, (1L << 22),
    32 * 1024, 1024 * 1024);
.Ed
.Pp
Ask for 8192 bytes of zero-filled memory residing between physical
address 0 and 4194303 inclusive, aligned to a 32K boundary and not
crossing a 1M address boundary.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr malloc 9
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The
.Fn contigmalloc
function will panic if
.Fa size
is zero, or if
.Fa alignment
or
.Fa boundary
is not a power of two.
