.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2006 Ceri Davies <ceri@FreeBSD.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2023 Olivier Certner <olce.freebsd@certner.fr>
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2023
.Dt CR_CANSEE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm cr_cansee
.Nd "determine visibility of objects given their user credentials"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/proc.h
.Ft int
.Fn cr_cansee "struct ucred *u1" "struct ucred *u2"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This function determines if a subject with credential
.Fa u1
can see a subject or object associated to credential
.Fa u2 .
.Pp
Specific types of subjects may need to submit to additional or different
restrictions.
As an example, for processes, see
.Xr p_cansee 9 ,
which calls this function.
.Pp
The implementation relies on
.Xr cr_bsd_visible 9
and consequently the
.Xr sysctl 8
variables referenced in its manual page influence the result.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
This function returns zero if the subject with credential
.Fa u1
can
.Dq see
the subject or object with credential
.Fa u2 ,
or
.Er ESRCH
otherwise.
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ESRCH
The subject with credential
.Fa u1
has been jailed and the subject or object with credential
.Fa u2
does not belong to the same jail or one of its sub-jails, as determined by
.Xr prison_check 9 .
.It Bq Er ESRCH
The MAC subsystem denied visibility.
.It Bq Er ESRCH
.Xr cr_bsd_visible 9
denied visibility according to the BSD security policies in force.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr prison_check 9 ,
.Xr mac 9 ,
.Xr cr_bsd_visible 9 ,
.Xr p_cansee 9
