.\" Copyright (c) 2020, Chelsio Inc
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Chelsio Inc nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 22, 2020
.Dt CRYPTO_REQUEST 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm crypto_request
.Nd symmetric cryptographic operations
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In opencrypto/cryptodev.h
.Ft int
.Fn crypto_dispatch "struct cryptop *crp"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_freereq "struct cryptop *crp"
.Ft "struct cryptop *"
.Fn crypto_getreq "crypto_session_t cses" "int how"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_use_buf "struct cryptop *crp" "void *buf" "int len"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_use_mbuf "struct cryptop *crp" "struct mbuf *m"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_use_uio "struct cryptop *crp" "struct uio *uio"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_use_output_buf "struct cryptop *crp" "void *buf" "int len"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_use_output_mbuf "struct cryptop *crp" "struct mbuf *m"
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_use_output_uio "struct cryptop *crp" "struct uio *uio"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Each symmetric cryptographic operation in the kernel is described by
an instance of
.Vt struct cryptop
and is associated with an active session.
.Pp
New requests are allocated by
.Fn crypto_getreq .
.Fa cses
is a reference to an active session.
.Fa how
is passed to
.Xr malloc 9
and should be set to either
.Dv M_NOWAIT
or
.Dv M_WAITOK .
The caller should then set fields in the returned structure to describe
request-specific parameters.
Unused fields should be left as-is.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_dispatch
passes a crypto request to the driver attached to the request's session.
If there are errors in the request's fields, this function may return
an error to the caller.
If errors are encountered while servicing the request, they will instead
be reported to the request's callback function
.Pq Fa crp_callback
via
.Fa crp_etype .
.Pp
Note that a request's callback function may be invoked before
.Fn crypto_dispatch
returns.
.Pp
Once a request has signaled completion by invoking its callback function,
it should be feed via
.Fn crypto_freereq .
.Pp
Cryptographic operations include several fields to describe the request.
.Ss Request Buffers
Requests can either specify a single data buffer that is modified in place
.Po
.Fa crp_buf
.Pc
or separate input
.Po
.Fa crp_buf
.Pc
and output
.Po
.Fa crp_obuf
.Pc
buffers.
Note that separate input and output buffers are not supported for compression
mode requests.
.Pp
All requests must have a valid
.Fa crp_buf
initialized by one of the following functions:
.Bl -tag -width "Fn crypto_use_mbuf"
.It Fn crypto_use_buf
Uses an array of
.Fa len
bytes pointed to by
.Fa buf
as the data buffer.
.It Fn crypto_use_mbuf
Uses the network memory buffer
.Fa m
as the data buffer.
.It Fn crypto_use_uio
Uses the scatter/gather list
.Fa uio
as the data buffer.
.El
.Pp
One of the following functions should be used to initialize
.Fa crp_obuf
for requests that use separate input and output buffers:
.Bl -tag -width "Fn crypto_use_output_mbuf"
.It Fn crypto_use_output_buf
Uses an array of
.Fa len
bytes pointed to by
.Fa buf
as the output buffer.
.It Fn crypto_use_output_mbuf
Uses the network memory buffer
.Fa m
as the output buffer.
.It Fn crypto_use_output_uio
Uses the scatter/gather list
.Fa uio
as the output buffer.
.El
.Ss Request Regions
Each request describes one or more regions in the data buffers.
Each region is described by an offset relative to the start of a
data buffer and a length.
The length of some regions is the same for all requests belonging to
a session.
Those lengths are set in the session parameters of the associated
session.
All requests must define a payload region.
Other regions are only required for specific session modes.
.Pp
For requests with separate input and output data buffers,
the AAD, IV, and payload regions are always defined as regions in the
input buffer,
and a separate payload output region is defined to hold the output of
encryption or decryption in the output buffer.
The digest region describes a region in the input data buffer for
requests that verify an existing digest.
For requests that compute a digest,
the digest region describes a region in the output data buffer.
Note that the only data written to the output buffer is the encryption
or decryption result and any computed digest.
AAD and IV regions are not copied from the input buffer into the output
buffer but are only used as inputs.
.Pp
The following regions are defined:
.Bl -column "Payload Output" "Input/Output"
.It Sy Region Ta Sy Buffer Ta Sy Description
.It AAD Ta Input Ta
Embedded Additional Authenticated Data
.It IV Ta Input Ta
Embedded IV or nonce
.It Payload Ta Input Ta
Data to encrypt, decrypt, compress, or decompress
.It Payload Output Ta Output Ta
Encrypted or decrypted data
.It Digest Ta Input/Output Ta
Authentication digest, hash, or tag
.El
.Bl -column "Payload Output" ".Fa crp_payload_output_start"
.It Sy Region Ta Sy Start Ta Sy Length
.It AAD Ta Fa crp_aad_start Ta Fa crp_aad_length
.It IV Ta Fa crp_iv_start Ta Fa csp_ivlen
.It Payload Ta Fa crp_payload_start Ta Fa crp_payload_length
.It Payload Output Ta Fa crp_payload_output_start Ta Fa crp_payload_length
.It Digest Ta Fa crp_digest_start Ta Fa csp_auth_mlen
.El
.Pp
Requests are permitted to operate on only a subset of the data buffer.
For example,
requests from IPsec operate on network packets that include headers not
used as either additional authentication data (AAD) or payload data.
.Ss Request Operations
All requests must specify the type of operation to perform in
.Fa crp_op .
Available operations depend on the session's mode.
.Pp
Compression requests support the following operations:
.Bl -tag -width CRYPTO_OP_DECOMPRESS
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_COMPRESS
Compress the data in the payload region of the data buffer.
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_DECOMPRESS
Decompress the data in the payload region of the data buffer.
.El
.Pp
Cipher requests support the following operations:
.Bl -tag -width CRYPTO_OP_DECRYPT
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_ENCRYPT
Encrypt the data in the payload region of the data buffer.
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_DECRYPT
Decrypt the data in the payload region of the data buffer.
.El
.Pp
Digest requests support the following operations:
.Bl -tag -width CRYPTO_OP_COMPUTE_DIGEST
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_COMPUTE_DIGEST
Calculate a digest over the payload region of the data buffer
and store the result in the digest region.
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_VERIFY_DIGEST
Calculate a digest over the payload region of the data buffer.
Compare the calculated digest to the existing digest from the digest region.
If the digests match,
complete the request successfully.
If the digests do not match,
fail the request with
.Er EBADMSG .
.El
.Pp
AEAD and Encrypt-then-Authenticate requests support the following
operations:
.Bl -tag -width CRYPTO_OP
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_ENCRYPT | Dv CRYPTO_OP_COMPUTE_DIGEST
Encrypt the data in the payload region of the data buffer.
Calculate a digest over the AAD and payload regions and store the
result in the data buffer.
.It Dv CRYPTO_OP_DECRYPT | Dv CRYPTO_OP_VERIFY_DIGEST
Calculate a digest over the AAD and payload regions of the data buffer.
Compare the calculated digest to the existing digest from the digest region.
If the digests match,
decrypt the payload region.
If the digests do not match,
fail the request with
.Er EBADMSG .
.El
.Ss Request AAD
AEAD and Encrypt-then-Authenticate requests may optionally include
Additional Authenticated Data.
AAD may either be supplied in the AAD region of the input buffer or
as a single buffer pointed to by
.Fa crp_aad .
In either case,
.Fa crp_aad_length
always indicates the amount of AAD in bytes.
.Ss Request IV and/or Nonce
Some cryptographic operations require an IV or nonce as an input.
An IV may be stored either in the IV region of the data buffer or in
.Fa crp_iv .
By default,
the IV is assumed to be stored in the IV region.
If the IV is stored in
.Fa crp_iv ,
.Dv CRYPTO_F_IV_SEPARATE
should be set in
.Fa crp_flags
and
.Fa crp_iv_start
should be left as zero.
.Pp
Requests that store part, but not all, of the IV in the data buffer should
store the partial IV in the data buffer and pass the full IV separately in
.Fa crp_iv .
.Ss Request and Callback Scheduling
The crypto framework provides multiple methods of scheduling the dispatch
of requests to drivers along with the processing of driver callbacks.
Requests use flags in
.Fa crp_flags
to select the desired scheduling methods.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_dispatch
can pass the request to the session's driver via three different methods:
.Bl -enum
.It
The request is queued to a taskqueue backed by a pool of worker threads.
By default the pool is sized to provide one thread for each CPU.
Worker threads dequeue requests and pass them to the driver
asynchronously.
.It
The request is passed to the driver synchronously in the context of the
thread invoking
.Fn crypto_dispatch .
.It
The request is queued to a queue of pending requests.
A single worker thread dequeues requests and passes them to the driver
asynchronously.
.El
.Pp
To select the first method (taskqueue backed by multiple threads),
requests should set
.Dv CRYPTO_F_ASYNC .
To always use the third method (queue to single worker thread),
requests should set
.Dv CRYPTO_F_BATCH .
If both flags are set,
.Dv CRYPTO_F_ASYNC
takes precedence.
If neither flag is set,
.Fn crypto_dispatch
will first attempt the second method (invoke driver synchronously).
If the driver is blocked,
the request will be queued using the third method.
One caveat is that the first method is only used for requests using software
drivers which use host CPUs to process requests.
Requests whose session is associated with a hardware driver will ignore
.Dv CRYPTO_F_ASYNC
and only use
.Dv CRYPTO_F_BATCH
to determine how requests should be scheduled.
.Pp
In addition to bypassing synchronous dispatch in
.Fn crypto_dispatch ,
.Dv CRYPTO_F_BATCH
requests additional changes aimed at optimizing batches of requests to
the same driver.
When the worker thread processes a request with
.Dv CRYPTO_F_BATCH ,
it will search the pending request queue for any other requests for the same
driver,
including requests from different sessions.
If any other requests are present,
.Dv CRYPTO_HINT_MORE
is passed to the driver's process method.
Drivers may use this to batch completion interrupts.
.Pp
Callback function scheduling is simpler than request scheduling.
Callbacks can either be invoked synchronously from
.Fn crypto_done ,
or they can be queued to a pool of worker threads.
This pool of worker threads is also sized to provide one worker thread
for each CPU by default.
Note that a callback function invoked synchronously from
.Fn crypto_done
must follow the same restrictions placed on threaded interrupt handlers.
.Pp
By default,
callbacks are invoked asynchronously by a worker thread.
If
.Dv CRYPTO_F_CBIMM
is set,
the callback is always invoked synchronously from
.Fn crypto_done .
If
.Dv CRYPTO_F_CBIFSYNC
is set,
the callback is invoked synchronously if the request was processed by a
software driver or asynchronously if the request was processed by a
hardware driver.
.Pp
If a request was scheduled to the taskqueue via
.Dv CRYPTO_F_ASYNC ,
callbacks are always invoked asynchronously ignoring
.Dv CRYPTO_F_CBIMM
and
.Dv CRYPTO_F_CBIFSYNC .
In this case,
.Dv CRYPTO_F_ASYNC_KEEPORDER
may be set to ensure that callbacks for requests on a given session are
invoked in the same order that requests were queued to the session via
.Fn crypto_dispatch .
This flag is used by IPsec to ensure that decrypted network packets are
passed up the network stack in roughly the same order they were received.
.Pp
.Ss Other Request Fields
In addition to the fields and flags enumerated above,
.Vt struct cryptop
includes the following:
.Bl -tag -width crp_payload_length
.It Fa crp_session
A reference to the active session.
This is set when the request is created by
.Fn crypto_getreq
and should not be modified.
Drivers can use this to fetch driver-specific session state or
session parameters.
.It Fa crp_etype
Error status.
Either zero on success, or an error if a request fails.
Set by drivers prior to completing a request via
.Fn crypto_done .
.It Fa crp_flags
A bitmask of flags.
The following flags are available in addition to flags discussed previously:
.Bl -tag -width CRYPTO_F_DONE
.It Dv CRYPTO_F_DONE
Set by
.Fa crypto_done
before calling
.Fa crp_callback .
This flag is not very useful and will likely be removed in the future.
It can only be safely checked from the callback routine at which point
it is always set.
.El
.It Fa crp_cipher_key
Pointer to a request-specific encryption key.
If this value is not set,
the request uses the session encryption key.
.It Fa crp_auth_key
Pointer to a request-specific authentication key.
If this value is not set,
the request uses the session authentication key.
.It Fa crp_opaque
An opaque pointer.
This pointer permits users of the cryptographic framework to store
information about a request to be used in the callback.
.It Fa crp_callback
Callback function.
This must point to a callback function of type
.Vt void (*)(struct cryptop *) .
The callback function should inspect
.Fa crp_etype
to determine the status of the completed operation.
It should also arrange for the request to be freed via
.Fn crypto_freereq .
.It Fa crp_olen
Used with compression and decompression requests to describe the updated
length of the payload region in the data buffer.
.Pp
If a compression request increases the size of the payload,
then the data buffer is unmodified, the request completes successfully,
and
.Fa crp_olen
is set to the size the compressed data would have used.
Callers can compare this to the payload region length to determine if
the compressed data was discarded.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn crypto_dispatch
returns an error if the request contained invalid fields,
or zero if the request was valid.
.Fn crypto_getreq
returns a pointer to a new request structure on success,
or
.Dv NULL
on failure.
.Dv NULL
can only be returned if
.Dv M_NOWAIT
was passed in
.Fa how .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr crypto 7 ,
.Xr crypto 9 ,
.Xr crypto_session 9 ,
.Xr mbuf 9
.Xr uio 9
.Sh BUGS
Not all drivers properly handle mixing session and per-request keys
within a single session.
Consumers should either use a single key for a session specified in
the session parameters or always use per-request keys.
