.\" Copyright (c) 2020, Chelsio Inc
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:
.\"
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
.\"    this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" 3. Neither the name of the Chelsio Inc nor the names of its
.\"    contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
.\"    this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
.\" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE
.\" LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR
.\" CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF
.\" SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
.\" INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN
.\" CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE)
.\" ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE
.\" POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" * Other names and brands may be claimed as the property of others.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd Feburary 11, 2022
.Dt CRYPTO_BUFFER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm crypto_buffer
.Nd symmetric cryptographic request buffers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In opencrypto/cryptodev.h
.Ft int
.Fo crypto_apply
.Fa "struct cryptop *crp"
.Fa "int off"
.Fa "int len"
.Fa "int (*f)(void *, void *, u_int)"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fc
.Ft int
.Fo crypto_apply_buf
.Fa "struct crypto_buffer *cb"
.Fa "int off"
.Fa "int len"
.Fa "int (*f)(void *, void *, u_int)"
.Fa "void *arg"
.Fc
.Ft void *
.Fo crypto_buffer_contiguous_subsegment
.Fa "struct crypto_buffer *cb"
.Fa "size_t skip"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fc
.Ft size_t
.Fn crypto_buffer_len "struct crypto_buffer *cb"
.Ft void *
.Fo crypto_contiguous_subsegment
.Fa "struct cryptop *crp"
.Fa "size_t skip"
.Fa "size_t len"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo crypto_cursor_init
.Fa "struct crypto_buffer_cursor *cc"
.Fa "const struct crypto_buffer *cb"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fn crypto_cursor_advance "struct crypto_buffer_cursor *cc" "size_t amount"
.Ft void
.Fo crypto_cursor_copyback
.Fa "struct crypto_buffer_cursor *cc"
.Fa "int size"
.Fa "const void *src"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo crypto_cursor_copydata
.Fa "struct crypto_buffer_cursor *cc"
.Fa "int size"
.Fa "void *dst"
.Fc
.Ft void
.Fo crypto_cursor_copydata_noadv
.Fa "struct crypto_buffer_cursor *cc"
.Fa "int size"
.Fa "void *dst"
.Fc
.Ft void *
.Fn crypto_cursor_segment "struct crypto_buffer_cursor *cc" "size_t *len"
.Ft void
.Fo crypto_cursor_copy
.Fa "const struct crypto_buffer_cursor *fromc"
.Fa "struct crypto_buffer_cursor *toc"
.Fc
.Ft bool
.Fn CRYPTO_HAS_OUTPUT_BUFFER "struct cryptop *crp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Symmetric cryptographic requests use data buffers to describe the data to
be modified.
Requests can either specify a single data buffer whose contents are modified
in place,
or requests may specify separate data buffers for input and output.
.Vt struct crypto_buffer
provides an abstraction that permits cryptographic requests to operate on
different types of buffers.
.Vt struct crypto_cursor
allows cryptographic drivers to iterate over a data buffer.
.Pp
.Fn CRYPTO_HAS_OUTPUT_BUFFER
returns true if
.Fa crp
uses separate buffers for input and output and false if
.Fa crp
uses a single buffer.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_buffer_len
returns the length of data buffer
.Fa cb
in bytes.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_apply_buf
invokes a caller-supplied function
to a region of the data buffer
.Fa cb .
The function
.Fa f
is called one or more times.
For each invocation,
the first argument to
.Fa f
is the value of
.Fa arg
passed to
.Fn crypto_apply_buf .
The second and third arguments to
.Fa f
are a pointer and length to a segment of the buffer mapped into the kernel.
The function is called enough times to cover the
.Fa len
bytes of the data buffer which starts at an offset
.Fa off .
If any invocation of
.Fa f
returns a non-zero value,
.Fn crypto_apply_buf
immediately returns that value without invoking
.Fa f
on any remaining segments of the region,
otherwise
.Fn crypto_apply_buf
returns the value from the final call to
.Fa f .
.Fn crypto_apply
invokes the callback
.Fa f
on a region of the input data buffer for
.Fa crp .
.Pp
.Fn crypto_buffer_contiguous_subsegment
attempts to locate a single, virtually-contiguous segment of the data buffer
.Fa cb .
The segment must be
.Fa len
bytes long and start at an offset of
.Fa skip
bytes.
If a segment is found,
a pointer to the start of the segment is returned.
Otherwise,
.Dv NULL
is returned.
.Fn crypto_contiguous_subsegment
attempts to locate a single, virtually-contiguous segment in the input data
buffer for
.Fa crp .
.Ss Data Buffers
Data buffers are described by an instance of
.Vt struct crypto buffer .
The
.Fa cb_type
member contains the type of the data buffer.
The following types are supported:
.Bl -tag -width "  CRYPTO_BUF_CONTIG"
.It Dv CRYPTO_BUF_NONE
An invalid buffer.
Used to mark the output buffer when a crypto request uses a single data buffer.
.It Dv CRYPTO_BUF_CONTIG
An array of bytes mapped into the kernel's address space.
.It Dv CRYPTO_BUF_UIO
A scatter/gather list of kernel buffers as described in
.Xr uio 9 .
.It Dv CRYPTO_BUF_MBUF
A chain of network memory buffers as described in
.Xr mbuf 9 .
.It Dv CRYPTO_BUF_SINGLE_MBUF
A single network memory buffer as described in
.Xr mbuf 9 .
.It Dv CRYPTO_BUF_VMPAGE
A scatter/gather list of
.Vt vm_page_t
structures describing pages in the kernel's address space.
This buffer type is only available if
.Dv CRYPTO_HAS_VMPAGE
is true.
.El
.Pp
The structure also contains the following type-specific fields:
.Bl -tag -width "  cb_vm_page_offset"
.It Fa cb_buf
A pointer to the start of a
.Dv CRYPTO_BUF_CONTIG
data buffer.
.It Fa cb_buf_len
The length of a
.Dv CRYPTO_BUF_CONTIG
data buffer
.It Fa cb_mbuf
A pointer to a
.Vt struct mbuf
for
.Dv CRYPTO_BUF_MBUF
and
.Dv CRYPTO_BUF_SINGLE_MBUF .
.It Fa cb_uio
A pointer to a
.Vt struct uio
for
.Dv CRYPTO_BUF_UIO .
.It Fa cb_vm_page
A pointer to an array of
.Vt struct vm_page
for
.Dv CRYPTO_BUF_VMPAGE .
.It Fa cb_vm_page_len
The total amount of data included in the
.Fa cb_vm_page
array, in bytes.
.It Fa cb_vm_page_offset
Offset in bytes in the first page of
.Fa cb_vm_page
where valid data begins.
.El
.Ss Cursors
Cursors provide a mechanism for iterating over a data buffer.
They are primarily intended for use in software drivers which access data
buffers via virtual addresses.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_init
initializes the cursor
.Fa cc
to reference the start of the data buffer
.Fa cb .
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_advance
advances the cursor
.Fa amount
bytes forward in the data buffer.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_copyback
copies
.Fa size
bytes from the local buffer pointed to by
.Fa src
into the data buffer associated with
.Fa cc .
The bytes are written to the current position of
.Fa cc ,
and the cursor is then advanced by
.Fa size
bytes.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_copydata
copies
.Fa size
bytes out of the data buffer associated with
.Fa cc
into a local buffer pointed to by
.Fa dst .
The bytes are read from the current position of
.Fa cc ,
and the cursor is then advanced by
.Fa size
bytes.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_copydata_noadv
is similar to
.Fn crypto_cursor_copydata
except that it does not change the current position of
.Fa cc .
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_segment
returns the start of the virtually-contiguous segment at the current position of
.Fa cc .
The length of the segment is stored in
.Fa len .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn crypto_apply
and
.Fn crypto_apply_buf
return the return value from the caller-supplied callback function.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_buffer_contiguous_subsegment ,
.Fn crypto_contiguous_subsegment ,
and
.Fn crypto_cursor_segment
return a pointer to a contiguous segment or
.Dv NULL .
.Pp
.Fn crypto_buffer_len
returns the length of a buffer in bytes.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_seglen
returns the length in bytes of a contiguous segment.
.Pp
.Fn crypto_cursor_copy
makes a deep copy of the cursor
.Fa fromc .
The two copies do not share any state and can thus be used
independently.
.Pp
.Fn CRYPTO_HAS_OUTPUT_BUFFER
returns true if the request uses a separate output buffer.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ipsec 4 ,
.Xr crypto 7 ,
.Xr bus_dma 9 ,
.Xr crypto 9 ,
.Xr crypto_driver 9 ,
.Xr crypto_request 9 ,
.Xr crypto_session 9 ,
.Xr mbuf 9 ,
.Xr uio 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
functions first appeared in
.Fx 13 .
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm
functions and this manual page were written by
.An John Baldwin Aq Mt jhb@FreeBSD.org .
