.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd February 5, 2025
.Dt DEVICE_DELETE_CHILD 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm device_delete_child
.Nd delete a child from a device
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Ft int
.Fn device_delete_child "device_t dev" "device_t child"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The specified device is removed from
.Fa dev
and deleted.
If the device is currently attached, it is first detached via
.Xr device_detach 9 .
If
.Fn device_detach
fails,
its error value is returned.
Otherwise,
all descendant devices of
.Fa child
are deleted and zero is returned.
.Pp
The
.Xr BUS_CHILD_DELETED 9
method is invoked for each device that is deleted.
This permits the parent device's driver to tear down any state associated
with child devices such as ivars.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr BUS_CHILD_DELETED 9 ,
.Xr device_add_child 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
