.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1998 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 16, 1998
.Dt DEVICE_ADD_CHILD 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm device_add_child ,
.Nm device_add_child_ordered
.Nd "add a new device as a child of an existing device"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/bus.h
.Ft device_t
.Fn device_add_child "device_t dev" "const char *name" "int unit"
.Ft device_t
.Fn device_add_child_ordered "device_t dev" "int order" "const char *name" "int unit"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Create a new child device of
.Fa dev .
The
.Fa name
and
.Fa unit
arguments specify the name and unit number of the device.
If the name is unknown then the caller should pass
.Dv NULL .
If the unit is unknown then the caller should pass
.Dv -1
and the system will choose the next available unit number.
.Pp
The name of the device is used to determine which drivers might be
appropriate for the device.
If a name is specified then only drivers of that name are probed.
If no name is given then all drivers for the
owning bus are probed.
.Pp
This allows busses which can uniquely identify device instances (such
as PCI) to allow each driver to check each device instance for a
match.
For busses which rely on supplied probe hints where only one
driver can have a change of probing the device, the driver name should
specified as the device name.
.Pp
Normally unit numbers will be chosen automatically by the system and a
unit number of
.Dv -1
should be given.
When a specific unit number is desired (e.g. for wiring a particular
piece of hardware to a pre-configured unit number), that unit should
be passed.
If the specified unit number is already allocated, a new
unit will be allocated and a diagnostic message printed.
.Pp
If the devices attached to a bus must be probed in a specific order
(e.g. for the ISA bus some devices are sensitive to failed probe attempts
of unrelated drivers and therefore must be probed first),
the
.Fa order
argument of
.Fn device_add_child_ordered
should be used to specify a partial ordering.
The new device will be added before any existing device with a greater
order.
If
.Fn device_add_child
is used, then the new child will be added as if its order was zero.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The new device if successful, NULL otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr device 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
