.\" Copyright (c) 2021 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\"
.\" This document was written by Ed Maste under sponsorship from
.\" The FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd June 24, 2025
.Dt GONE_IN 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm gone_in ,
.Nm gone_in_dev
.Nd deprecation notice functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/systm.h
.Ft void
.Fn gone_in "int major" "const char *msg" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn gone_in_dev "device_t dev" "int major" "const char *msg" "..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm gone_in
functions are used to provide a notice that the kernel is actively using a
driver or some other functionality that is deprecated, and is planned for
removal in a future
.Fx
release.
The notice is sent to the kernel
.Xr dmesg 8
log and will appear on the console.
The
.Fa major
argument specifies the major version of the
.Fx
release that will remove the deprecated functionality.
The notice shall be printed only once, thus
.Nm
functions are safe to use in often executed code paths.
.Pp
.Nm gone_in_dev
will prepend driver name before the notice.
.Pp
In releases before
.Fa major
the provided notice will be appended with
.Do
To be removed in FreeBSD
.Fa major Ns
.Dc .
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void
example_api(foo_t *args)
{
	gone_in(16, "Warning! %s[%u] uses obsolete API. ",
	    curthread->td_proc->p_comm, curthread->td_proc->p_pid);

	/* API implementation omitted. */
}

int
example_driver_attach(struct example_driver_softc *sc)
{
	/* Attach code omitted. */

        gone_in_dev(sc->dev, 16, "driver is deprecated");
}
.Ed
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
functions first appeared in
.Fx 11 .
