.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\" Copyright (C) 2023 Olivier Certner <olce.freebsd@certner.fr>
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2023
.Dt GROUPMEMBER 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm groupmember
.Nd checks if credentials mandate some group membership
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/ucred.h
.Ft bool
.Fn groupmember "gid_t gid" "struct ucred *cred"
.Ft bool
.Fn realgroupmember "gid_t gid" "struct ucred *cred"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn groupmember
function checks if credentials
.Fa cred
indicate that the associated subject or object is a member of the group
designated by the group ID
.Fa gid .
.Pp
Considered groups in
.Fa cred
are the effective and supplementary groups.
The real group is not taken into account.
.Pp
Function
.Fn realgroupmember
works the same except that it considers instead the real and supplementary
groups, and not the effective one.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn groupmember
and
.Fn realgroupmember
functions return
.Dv true
if the given credentials indicate membership of the group
.Fa gid ,
or
.Dv false
otherwise.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr getgroups 2 ,
.Xr setgroups 2
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was initially written by
.An -nosplit
.An Chad David Aq Mt davidc@acns.ab.ca
and was revised by
.An Olivier Certner Aq Mt olce.freebsd@certner.fr .
