.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Gleb Smirnoff <glebius@FreeBSD.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd April 12, 2026
.Dt HASHALLOC 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm hashalloc ,
.Nm hashfree
.Nd allocate and free kernel hash tables
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/malloc.h
.In sys/hash.h
.Ft void *
.Fn hashalloc "struct hashalloc_args *args"
.Ft void
.Fn hashfree "void *table" "struct hashalloc_args *args"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn hashalloc
and
.Fn hashfree
functions provide a flexible kernel programming interface (KPI) for allocating
and freeing hash tables with configurable bucket headers.
.Pp
.Pp
.Fn hashalloc
allocates memory for a hash table according to the parameters
specified in the
.Fa args
structure.
It computes an appropriate number of buckets (adjusting
.Fa args->size
as needed based on the requested
.Fa type ) ,
allocates memory using
.Xr malloc 9 ,
initializes each bucket's queue header (e.g.,
.Vt LIST_HEAD ,
.Vt TAILQ_HEAD ,
etc.), and, if requested, initializes per-bucket locks.
The returned memory allocation can be used as an array of header structures
that start with initialized list header of the requested type followed by
initialized lock of requested type.
.Pp
.Fn hashfree
frees a hash table previously allocated by
.Fn hashalloc .
.Pp
Both functions require the caller to pass the same (or equivalent)
.Fa struct hashalloc_args
that specifies the desired configuration of the hash table and has the
following members:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct hashalloc_args {
    /* Required arguments */
    size_t  size;          /* in: desired buckets, out: allocated */
    int     mflags;            /* malloc(9) flags */
    struct malloc_type *mtype; /* malloc(9) type */
    /* Optional arguments */
    size_t  hdrsize;            /* bucket header size; 0 = auto */
    enum {
        HASH_TYPE_POWER2,
        HASH_TYPE_PRIME,
    }       type;               /* default HASH_TYPE_POWER2 */
    enum {
        HASH_HEAD_LIST,
        HASH_HEAD_CK_LIST,
        HASH_HEAD_SLIST,
        HASH_HEAD_CK_SLIST,
        HASH_HEAD_STAILQ,
        HASH_HEAD_CK_STAILQ,
        HASH_HEAD_TAILQ,
    }       head;               /* default HASH_HEAD_LIST */
    enum {
        HASH_LOCK_NONE,
        HASH_LOCK_MTX,
        HASH_LOCK_RWLOCK,
        HASH_LOCK_SX,
        HASH_LOCK_RMLOCK,
        HASH_LOCK_RMSLOCK,
    }       lock;               /* default HASH_LOCK_NONE */
    int     lopts;              /* lock init options */
    const char *lname;          /* lock name */
    int  (*ctor)(void *);	/* bucket constructor */
    void (*dtor)(void *);	/* bucket destructor */
    /* Returned arguments */
    int error;                  /* error code in case of failure */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Argument members
.Fa size ,
.Fa mflags
and
.Fa mtype
are required for the
.Fn hashalloc .
The argument
.Fa size ,
as filled by earlier call to
.Fn hashalloc ,
and
.Fa mtype
are required for the
.Fn hashfree .
The rest of arguments are optional and have reasonable defaults.
A hash table that was allocated with a non-default allocation arguments shall
pass the same arguments to
.Fn hashfree .
The structure shall be initialized with sparse C99 initializer as it may
contain opaque extension members.
The structure may be allocated on the stack of a caller.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa hdrsize"
.It Fa size
Desired number of buckets for
.Fn hashalloc .
Upon a successful return
.Fn hashalloc
sets this member to the actual number allocated
(may be rounded up to power-of-2 or nearest prime).
The value returned by
.Fn hashalloc
shall be later supplied to the
.Fn hashfree .
.It Fa mflags , Fa mtype
Passed directly to
.Xr malloc 9 .
.It Fa hdrsize
Optional member that allows the caller to set a different (increased) size
of a bucket header.
.It Fa type
Bucket count policy:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv HASH_TYPE_POWER2"
.It Dv HASH_TYPE_POWER2
Rounded up to largest power of two less than or equal to argument
.Fa size .
.It Dv HASH_TYPE_PRIME
Sized to the largest prime number less than or equal to argument
.Fa size .
.El
.Pp
Default is
.Dv HASH_TYPE_POWER2 .
.It Fa head
Queue header type for each bucket, a
.Xr queue 3
or
Concurrency-kit (CK) type.
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv HASH_HEAD_CK_STAILQ"
.It Dv HASH_HEAD_LIST
.Xr queue 3
.Fd LIST_HEAD
.It Dv HASH_HEAD_CK_LIST
Concurrency-kit
.Fd CK_LIST_HEAD
.It Dv HASH_HEAD_SLIST
.Xr queue 3
.Fd SLIST_HEAD
.It Dv HASH_HEAD_CK_SLIST
Concurrency-kit
.Fd CK_SLIST_HEAD
.It Dv HASH_HEAD_STAILQ
.Xr queue 3
.Fd STAILQ_HEAD
.It Dv HASH_HEAD_CK_STAILQ
Concurrency-kit
.Fd CK_STAILQ_HEAD
.It Dv HASH_HEAD_TAILQ
.Xr queue 3
.Fd TAILQ_HEAD
.El
.Pp
Default is
.Dv HASH_HEAD_LIST .
.It Fa lock
Synchronization:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv HASH_LOCK_RWLOCK"
.It Dv HASH_LOCK_NONE
No per-bucket lock.
.It Dv HASH_LOCK_MTX
Per-bucket
.Xr mutex 9 .
.It Dv HASH_LOCK_RWLOCK
Per-bucket
.Xr rwlock 9 .
.It Dv HASH_LOCK_SX
Per-bucket
.Xr sx 9 .
.It Dv HASH_LOCK_RMLOCK
Per-bucket
.Xr rmlock 9 .
.It Dv HASH_LOCK_RMSLOCK
Per-bucket sleepable (rms)
.Xr rmlock 9 .
.El
.Pp
Default is
.Dv HASH_LOCK_NONE .
.It Fa lopts
Options passed to
.Xr mtx_init 9 ,
.Xr rw_init 9 ,
.Xr sx_init 9 ,
.Xr rm_init 9
or
.Xr rms_init 9
(if locking is enabled).
.It Fa lname
Lock name.
This member is required unless
.Fa lock
is
.Dv HASH_LOCK_NONE .
.It Fa ctor
Optional constructor to be called by
.Fn hashalloc
for each bucket after list header and lock initialization.
May fail with error code, yielding in a failure of
.Fn hashalloc .
.It Fa dtor
Optional destructor to be called by
.Fn hashfree
for each bucket before lock destructors and list emptyness checks.
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn hashalloc
returns a pointer to the allocated and initialized hash table on success, or
.Dv NULL
on memory allocation failure or constructor failure.
The
.Fa error
member of
.Fa args
is set to appropriate error code.
When
.Fa mflags
in
.Fa args
contain the
.Va M_WAITOK
flag and the
.Fa ctor
is either NULL or never fails, then
.Fn hashalloc
never fails.
.Sh EXAMPLES
A simple mutex-protected hash table using TAILQ buckets:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct bucket {
    TAILQ_HEAD(, foo)   head;
    struct mtx          lock;
} *table;

struct hashalloc_args args = {
    .size    = 9000,
    .mflags  = M_WAITOK,
    .mtype   = M_FOO,
    .head    = HASH_HEAD_TAILQ,
    .lock    = HASH_LOCK_MTX,
    .lopts   = MTX_DEF,
    .lname   = "bucket of foo",
};

table = hashalloc(&args);
/* Use table as array of struct bucket ... */
mtx_lock(&table[hash].lock);
TAILQ_INSERT_HEAD(&table[hash].head, foo, next);

/* Later */
hashfree(table, &args);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr malloc 9 ,
.Xr mutex 9 ,
.Xr rmlock 9 ,
.Xr rwlock 9 ,
.Xr sx 9 ,
.Xr queue 3
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
KPI first appeared in
.Fx 16.0 .
It supersedes older interface
.Fn hashinit ,
that was available since
.Bx 4.4 ,
by offering greater control over the hash table structure and locking
strategy.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Gleb Smirnoff Aq Mt glebius@FreeBSD.org
