.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Bruce M. Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Darron Broad <darron@kewl.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" $Id: ieee80211_ioctl.9,v 1.5 2004/03/04 12:33:27 bruce Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 2, 2004
.Dt IEEE80211_IOCTL 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ieee80211_cfgget , ieee80211_cfgset , ieee80211_ioctl
.Nd 802.11 interface ioctl commands
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In net80211/ieee80211_var.h
.In net80211/ieee80211_proto.h
.In net80211/ieee80211_ioctl.h
.Ft int
.Fn ieee80211_cfgget "struct ifnet *ifp" "u_long cmd" "caddr_t data"
.Ft int
.Fn ieee80211_cfgset "struct ifnet *ifp" "u_long cmd" "caddr_t data"
.Ft int
.Fn ieee80211_ioctl "struct ifnet *ifp" "u_long cmd" "caddr_t data"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These
functions are typically invoked by drivers in response to requests
for information or to change settings from the userland.
.Pp
.\"
The
.Fn ieee80211_cfgget
and
.Fn ieee80211_cfgset
functions implement a legacy interface for getting and setting 802.11
interface attributes respectively.
The interface is compatible with the RIDs implemented by the legacy
.Xr owi 4
driver and used by the
.Xr wicontrol 8
utility.
.Pp
.\"
The
.Fn ieee80211_ioctl
function provides a default implementation of the
.Dv SIOCS80211
and
.Dv SIOCG80211
ifioctls commands for 802.11 drivers.
The call signature is identical to that of the
.Va if_ioctl
member found in
.Vt struct ifnet ,
however, many drivers store attributes such as
.Dv IEEE80211_IOC_STATIONNAME
in the driver's private soft state structure, so driver writers may prefer
to use this as the catch-all in a switch statement to avoid code duplication.
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ifconfig 8 ,
.Xr wicontrol 8 ,
.Xr ieee80211 9 ,
.Xr ifnet 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ieee80211
series of functions first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 ,
and were later ported to
.Fx 4.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M. Simpson Aq bms@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Darron Broad Aq darron@kewl.org .
