.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Bruce M. Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Darron Broad <darron@kewl.org>
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\" $Id: ieee80211_input.9,v 1.6 2004/03/04 12:33:27 bruce Exp $
.\"
.Dd March 2, 2004
.Dt IEEE80211_INPUT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm ieee80211_input , ieee80211_decap , ieee80211_recv_mgmt
.Nd software 802.11 stack input functions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In net80211/ieee80211_var.h
.In net80211/ieee80211_proto.h
.Ft void
.Fo ieee80211_input
.Fa "struct ifnet *ifp" "struct mbuf *m" "struct ieee80211_node *ni"
.Fa "int rssi" "u_int32_t rstamp"
.Fc
.Ft struct mbuf *
.Fn ieee80211_decap "struct ifnet *ifp" "struct mbuf *m"
.Ft void
.Fo ieee80211_recv_mgmt
.Fa "struct ieee80211com *ic" "struct mbuf *m0" "struct ieee80211_node *ni"
.Fa "int subtype" "int rssi" "u_int32_t rstamp"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These
functions process received 802.11 frames.
.Pp
.\"
The
.Fn ieee80211_input
function takes an mbuf chain
.Fa m
containing a complete 802.11 frame from the driver
.Fa ifp
and passes it to the software 802.11 stack for input processing.
The
.Fa ni
argument specifies an instance of
.Vt struct ieee80211_node
(which may be driver-specific) representing the node from which the
frame was received.
The arguments
.Fa rssi
and
.Fa stamp
are typically derived from on-card data structures; they are used for
recording the signal strength and time received of the frame respectively.
.Pp
.\"
The
.Fn ieee80211_decap
function performs decapsulation of the 802.11 frame in the mbuf chain
.Fa m
received by the device
.Fa ifp ,
taking the form of the 802.11 address fields into account;
the structure of 802.11 addresses vary according to the intended
source and destination of the frame.
It is typically called from within
.Fn ieee80211_input .
.Pp
.\"
The
.Fn ieee80211_recv_mgmt
performs input processing for 802.11 management frames.
It is typically called from within
.Fn ieee80211_input .
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ieee80211 9 ,
.Xr ifnet 9
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm ieee80211
series of functions first appeared in
.Nx 1.5 ,
and were later ported to
.Fx 4.6 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M. Simpson Aq bms@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Darron Broad Aq darron@kewl.org .
.Sh BUGS
There is no netisr queue specifically for the software 802.11 stack yet.
