.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2002 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 9, 2001
.Dt LOCK 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm lockinit ,
.Nm lockdestroy ,
.Nm lockcount ,
.Nm lockmgr ,
.Nm lockstatus ,
.Nm lockmgr_printinfo
.Nd "lockmgr family of functions"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/types.h
.In sys/lockmgr.h
.Ft void
.Fn lockinit "struct lock *lkp" "int prio" "const char *wmesg" "int timo" "int flags"
.Ft void
.Fn lockdestroy "struct lock *lkp"
.Ft int
.Fn lockcount "struct lock *lkp"
.Ft int
.Fn lockmgr "struct lock *lkp" "u_int flags" "struct mtx *interlkp" "struct thread *td"
.Ft int
.Fn lockstatus "struct lock *lkp" "struct thread *td"
.Ft void
.Fn lockmgr_printinfo "struct lock *lkp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn lockinit
function is used to initialize a lock.
It must be called before any operation can be performed on a lock.
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa wmesg"
.It Fa lkp
A pointer to the lock to initialize.
.It Fa prio
The priority passed to
.Xr msleep 9 .
.It Fa wmesg
The lock message.
This is used for both debugging output and
.Xr msleep 9 .
.It Fa timo
The timeout value passed to
.Xr msleep 9 .
.It Fa flags
The flags the lock is to be initialized with.
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv LG_CANRECURSE"
.It Dv LK_NOWAIT
Do not sleep while acquiring the lock.
.It Dv LK_SLEEPFAIL
Fail after a sleep.
.It Dv LK_CANRECURSE
Allow recursive exclusive locks.
.It Dv LK_REENABLE
Re-enable the lock after a drain.
.It Dv LK_NOPAUSE
Disable the spinlock while acquiring the lock.
.It Dv LK_TIMELOCK
Use
.Fa timo
during a sleep; otherwise, 0 is used.
.El
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn lockdestroy
function is used to destroy a lock, and while it is called in a number of
places in the kernel, it currently does nothing.
.Pp
The
.Fn lockcount
function returns a count of the number of exclusive locks and shared locks
held against the lock
.Fa lkp .
.Pp
The
.Fn lockmgr
function handles general locking functionality within the kernel, including
support for shared and exclusive locks, and recursion.
.Fn lockmgr
is also able to upgrade and downgrade locks.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width ".Fa interlkp"
.It Fa lkp
A pointer to the lock to manipulate.
.It Fa flags
Flags indicating what action is to be taken.
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv LK_EXCLUPGRADE"
.It Dv LK_SHARED
Acquire a shared lock.
If an exclusive lock is currently held, it will be downgraded.
.It Dv LK_EXCLUSIVE
Acquire an exclusive lock.
If an exclusive lock is already held, and
.Dv LK_CANRECURSE
is not set, the system will
.Xr panic 9 .
.It Dv LK_DOWNGRADE
Downgrade exclusive lock to a shared lock.
Downgrading a shared lock is not permitted.
If an exclusive lock has been recursed, all references will be downgraded.
.It Dv LK_EXCLUPGRADE
Upgrade a shared lock to an exclusive lock.
Fails with
.Er EBUSY
if there is someone ahead of you in line waiting for an upgrade.
If this call fails, the shared lock is lost.
Attempts to upgrade an exclusive lock will cause a
.Xr panic 9 .
.It Dv LK_UPGRADE
Upgrade a shared lock to an exclusive lock.
If this call fails, the shared lock is lost.
Attempts to upgrade an exclusive lock will cause a
.Xr panic 9 .
.It Dv LK_RELEASE
Release the lock.
Releasing a lock that is not held can cause a
.Xr panic 9 .
.It Dv LK_DRAIN
Wait for all activity on the lock to end, then mark it decommissioned.
This is used before freeing a lock that is part of a piece of memory that is
about to be freed.
(As documented in
.In sys/lockmgr.h . )
.It Dv LK_SLEEPFAIL
Fail if operation has slept.
.It Dv LK_NOWAIT
Do not allow the call to sleep.
This can be used to test the lock.
.It Dv LK_CANRECURSE
Allow recursion on an exclusive lock.
For every lock there must be a release.
.It Dv LK_INTERLOCK
Unlock the interlock (which should be locked already).
.El
.It Fa interlkp
An interlock mutex for controlling group access to the lock.
If
.Dv LK_INTERLOCK
is specified,
.Fn lockmgr
assumes
.Fa interlkp
is currently owned and not recursed, and will return it unlocked.
See
.Xr mtx_assert 9 .
.It Fa td
A thread responsible for this call.
.Dv NULL
becomes
.Dv LK_KERNPROC .
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn lockstatus
function returns the status of the lock in relation to the
.Vt thread
passed to it.
Note that if
.Fa td
is
.Dv NULL
and an exclusive lock is held,
.Dv LK_EXCLUSIVE
will be returned.
.Pp
The
.Fn lockmgr_printinfo
function prints debugging information about the lock.
It is used primarily by
.Xr VOP_PRINT 9
functions.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn lockcount
function returns an integer greater than or equal to zero.
.Pp
The
.Fn lockmgr
function returns 0 on success and non-zero on failure.
.Pp
The
.Fn lockstatus
function returns:
.Bl -tag -width ".Dv LK_EXCLUSIVE"
.It Dv LK_EXCLUSIVE
An exclusive lock is held by the thread
.Fa td .
.It Dv LK_EXCLOTHER
An exclusive lock is held by someone other than the thread
.Fa td .
.It Dv LK_SHARED
A shared lock is held.
.It Li 0
The lock is not held by anyone.
.El
.Sh ERRORS
.Fn lockmgr
fails if:
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EBUSY
.Dv LK_FORCEUPGRADE
was requested and another thread had already requested a lock upgrade.
.It Bq Er EBUSY
.Dv LK_NOWAIT
was set, and a sleep would have been required.
.It Bq Er ENOLCK
.Dv LK_SLEEPFAIL
was set and
.Fn lockmgr
did sleep.
.It Bq Er EINTR
.Dv PCATCH
was set in the lock priority, and a signal was delivered during a sleep.
Note the
.Er ERESTART
error below.
.It Bq Er ERESTART
.Dv PCATCH
was set in the lock priority, a signal was delivered during a sleep,
and the system call is to be restarted.
.It Bq Er EWOULDBLOCK
a non-zero timeout was given, and the timeout expired.
.El
.Sh LOCKS
If
.Dv LK_INTERLOCK
is passed in the
.Fa flags
argument to
.Fn lockmgr ,
the
.Fa interlkp
must be held prior to calling
.Fn lockmgr ,
and will be returned unlocked.
.Pp
Upgrade attempts that fail result in the loss of the lock that
is currently held.
Also, it is invalid to upgrade an
exclusive lock, and a
.Xr panic 9
will be the result of trying.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr msleep 9 ,
.Xr mtx_assert 9 ,
.Xr panic 9 ,
.Xr VOP_PRINT 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Chad David Aq davidc@acns.ab.ca .
