.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Chris Costello
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd May 27, 2001
.Os
.Dt MAKE_DEV 9
.Sh NAME
.Nm make_dev ,
.Nm make_dev_alias ,
.Nm destroy_dev ,
.Nm dev_depends
.Nd manage
.Vt dev_t Ns 's
and DEVFS registration for devices
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/conf.h
.Ft dev_t
.Fn make_dev "struct cdevsw *cdevsw" "int minor" "uid_t uid" "gid_t gid" "int perms" "const char *fmt" ...
.Ft dev_t
.Fn make_dev_alias "dev_t pdev" "const char *fmt" ...
.Ft void
.Fn destroy_dev "dev_t dev"
.Ft void
.Fn dev_depends "dev_t pdev" "dev_t cdev"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn make_dev
function creates a
.Fa dev_t
structure for a new device.
If DEVFS is available, it is also notified of
the presence of the new device.
The device will be owned by
.Va uid ,
with the group ownership as
.Va gid ,
and with the name as specified in
.Va name .
The permissions of the file specified in
.Va perms
are defined in
.In sys/stat.h :
.Pp
.Bd -literal -offset indent -compact
#define S_IRWXU 0000700    /* RWX mask for owner */
#define S_IRUSR 0000400    /* R for owner */
#define S_IWUSR 0000200    /* W for owner */
#define S_IXUSR 0000100    /* X for owner */

#define S_IRWXG 0000070    /* RWX mask for group */
#define S_IRGRP 0000040    /* R for group */
#define S_IWGRP 0000020    /* W for group */
#define S_IXGRP 0000010    /* X for group */

#define S_IRWXO 0000007    /* RWX mask for other */
#define S_IROTH 0000004    /* R for other */
#define S_IWOTH 0000002    /* W for other */
#define S_IXOTH 0000001    /* X for other */

#define S_ISUID 0004000    /* set user id on execution */
#define S_ISGID 0002000    /* set group id on execution */
#define S_ISVTX 0001000    /* sticky bit */
#ifndef _POSIX_SOURCE
#define S_ISTXT 0001000
#endif
.Ed
.Pp
The
.Fn make_dev_alias
function takes the returned
.Ft dev_t
from
.Fn make_dev
and makes another (aliased) name for this device.
It is an error to call
.Fn make_dev_alias
prior to calling
.Fn make_dev .
.Pp
The
.Fn destroy_dev
function takes the returned
.Fa dev_t
from
.Fn make_dev
and destroys the registration for that device.
Do not call
.Fn destroy_dev
on devices that were created with
.Fn make_dev_alias .
.Pp
The
.Fn dev_depends
function establishes a parent-child relationship between two devices.
The net effect is that a
.Fn destroy_dev
of the parent device will also result in the destruction of the
child device(s),
if any exist.
A device may simultaneously be a parent and a child,
so it is possible to build a complete hierarchy.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr devfs 5
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Fn make_dev
and
.Fn destroy_dev
functions first appeared in
.Fx 4.0 .
The function
.Fn make_dev_alias
first appeared in
.Fx 4.1 .
The function
.Fn dev_depends
first appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
