.\"-
.\" Copyright (c) 2004 Dag-Erling Coïdan Smørgrav
.\" Copyright (c) 2005 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 7, 2005
.Dt MUTEX_PROFILING 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm MUTEX_PROFILING
.Nd kernel mutex profiling support
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd "options MUTEX_PROFILING"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
kernel option adds support for measuring and reporting mutex use and
contention statistics.
These statistics are collated by
.Dq acquisition point .
Acquisition points are
distinct places in the kernel source code (identified by source file
name and line number) where a mutex is acquired.
.Pp
For each acquisition point, the following statistics are accumulated:
.Bl -bullet
.It
The total number of non-recursive acquisitions.
.It
The total time the mutex was held after being acquired at this point.
.It
The longest time the mutex was ever continuously held after being
acquired at this point.
.It
The total number of times the mutex was already held by another thread
when this point was reached, requiring a spin or a sleep.
.It
The total number of time another thread tried to acquire the mutex
while it was held after having been acquired at this point.
.El
.Pp
In addition, the average hold time is derived from the total hold time
and the number of acquisitions.
.Pp
The
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
kernel option also adds the following
.Xr sysctl 8
variables to control and monitor the profiling code:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.enable
Enable or disable the mutex profiling code.
This defaults to 0 (off).
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.reset
Reset the current mutex profiling buffers.
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.acquisitions
The total number of mutex acquisitions recorded.
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.records
The total number of acquisition points recorded.
Note that only active acquisition points (i.e., points that have been
reached at least once) are counted.
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.maxrecords
The maximum number of acquisition points the profiling code is capable
of monitoring.
Since it would not be possible to call
.Xr malloc 9
from within the mutex profiling code, this is a static limit.
The number of records can be changed with the
.Dv MPROF_BUFFERS
kernel option.
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.rejected
The number of acquisition points that were ignored after the table
filled up.
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.hashsize
The size of the hash table used to map acquisition points to
statistics records.
The hash size can be changed with the
.Dv MPROF_HASH_SIZE
kernel option.
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.collisions
The number of hash collisions in the acquisition point hash table.
.It Va debug.mutex.prof.stats
The actual profiling statistics in plain text.
The columns are as follows, from left to right:
.Bl -tag -width ".Va cnt_hold"
.It Va max
The longest continuous hold time in microseconds.
.It Va total
The total (accumulated) hold time in microseconds.
.It Va count
The total number of acquisitions.
.It Va avg
The average hold time in microseconds, derived from the total hold time
and the number of acquisitions.
.It Va cnt_hold
The number of times the mutex was held and another thread attempted to
lock the mutex.
.It Va cnt_lock
The number of times the mutex was already locked when this point was
reached.
.It Va name
The name of the acquisition point, derived from the source file name
and line number, followed by the name of the mutex in parentheses.
.El
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr sysctl 8 ,
.Xr mutex 9
.Sh HISTORY
Mutex profiling support appeared in
.Fx 5.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Nm
code was written by
.An Eivind Eklund Aq eivind@FreeBSD.org ,
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@FreeBSD.org
and
.An Robert Watson Aq rwatson@FreeBSD.org .
This manual page was written by
.An Dag-Erling Sm\(/orgrav Aq des@FreeBSD.org .
.Sh NOTES
The
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
option increases the size of
.Vt "struct mtx" ,
so a kernel built with that option will not work with modules built
without it.
.Pp
The
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
option also prevents inlining of the mutex code, which results in a
fairly severe performance penalty.
It should therefore only be enabled on systems where mutex profiling
is actually needed.
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
will introduce a substantial performance overhead that is easily
monitorable using other profiling tools, so combining profiling tools
with
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
is not recommended.
.Pp
Measurements are made and stored in nanoseconds using
.Xr nanotime 9 ,
but are presented in microseconds.
This should still be sufficient for the locks one would be most
interested in profiling (those that are held long and/or acquired
often).
.Pp
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
should generally not be used in combination with other debugging options, as
the results may be strongly affected by interactions between the features.
In particular,
.Dv MUTEX_PROFILING
will report higher than normal
.Xr uma 9
lock contention when run with
.Dv INVARIANTS
due to extra locking that occurs when
.Dv INVARIANTS
is present; likewise, using it in combination with
.Dv WITNESS
with
will lead to much higher lock hold times and contention in profiling output.
