.\"	$NetBSD: pfil.9,v 1.22 2003/07/01 13:04:06 wiz Exp $
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Matthew R. Green
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\" 3. The name of the author may not be used to endorse or promote products
.\"    derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 29, 2004
.Dt PFIL 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pfil ,
.Nm pfil_head_register ,
.Nm pfil_head_unregister ,
.Nm pfil_head_get ,
.Nm pfil_hook_get ,
.Nm pfil_add_hook ,
.Nm pfil_remove_hook ,
.Nm pfil_run_hooks
.Nd packet filter interface
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/mbuf.h
.In net/if.h
.In net/pfil.h
.Ft int
.Fn pfil_head_register "struct pfil_head *head"
.Ft int
.Fn pfil_head_unregister "struct pfil_head *head"
.Ft "struct pfil_head *"
.Fn pfil_head_get "int af" "u_long dlt"
.Ft "struct packet_filter_hook *"
.Fn pfil_hook_get "int dir" "struct pfil_head *head"
.Ft void
.Fn pfil_add_hook "int (*func)()" "void *arg" "int flags" "struct pfil_head *"
.Ft void
.Fn pfil_remove_hook "int (*func)()" "void *arg" "int flags" "struct pfil_head *"
.Ft int
.Fn (*func) "void *arg" "struct mbuf **mp" "struct ifnet *" "int dir" "struct inpcb *"
.Ft int
.Fn pfil_run_hooks "struct pfil_head *head" "struct mbuf **mp" "struct ifnet *" "int dir" "struct inpcb *"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
framework allows for a specified function to be invoked for every
incoming or outgoing packet for a particular network I/O stream.
These hooks may be used to implement a firewall or perform packet
transformations.
.Pp
Packet filtering points are registered with
.Fn pfil_head_register .
Filtering points are identified by a key
.Pq Vt "void *"
and a data link type
.Pq Vt int
in the
.Vt pfil_head
structure.
Packet filters use the key and data link type to look up the filtering
point with which they register themselves.
The key is unique to the filtering point.
The data link type is a
.Xr bpf 4
DLT constant indicating what kind of header is present on the packet
at the filtering point.
Filtering points may be unregistered with the
.Fn pfil_head_unregister
function.
.Pp
Packet filters register/unregister themselves with a filtering point
with the
.Fn pfil_add_hook
and
.Fn pfil_remove_hook
functions, respectively.
The head is looked up using the
.Fn pfil_head_get
function, which takes the key and data link type that the packet filter
expects.
Filters may provide an argument to be passed to the filter when
invoked on a packet.
.Pp
When a filter is invoked, the packet appears just as if it
.Dq came off the wire .
That is, all protocol fields are in network byte order.
The filter is called with its specified argument, the pointer to the
pointer to the
.Vt mbuf
containing the packet, the pointer to the network
interface that the packet is traversing, and the direction
.Dv ( PFIL_IN
or
.Dv PFIL_OUT )
that the packet is traveling.
The filter may change which mbuf the
.Vt "mbuf\ **"
argument references.
The filter returns an error (errno) if the packet processing is to stop, or 0
if the processing is to continue.
If the packet processing is to stop, it is the responsibility of the
filter to free the packet.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If successful,
.Fn pfil_head_get
returns the
.Vt pfil_head
structure for the given key/dlt.
The
.Fn pfil_add_hook
and
.Fn pfil_remove_hook
functions
return 0 if successful.
If called with flag
.Dv PFIL_WAITOK ,
.Fn pfil_remove_hook
is expected to always succeed.
.Pp
The
.Fn pfil_head_unregister
function
might sleep!
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bpf 4 ,
.Xr if_bridge 4
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
interface first appeared in
.Nx 1.3 .
The
.Nm
input and output lists were originally implemented as
.In sys/queue.h
.Dv LIST
structures;
however this was changed in
.Nx 1.4
to
.Dv TAILQ
structures.
This change was to allow the input and output filters to be processed in
reverse order, to allow the same path to be taken, in or out of the kernel.
.Pp
The
.Nm
interface was changed in 1.4T to accept a 3rd parameter to both
.Fn pfil_add_hook
and
.Fn pfil_remove_hook ,
introducing the capability of per-protocol filtering.
This was done primarily in order to support filtering of IPv6.
.Pp
In 1.5K, the
.Nm
framework was changed to work with an arbitrary number of filtering points,
as well as be less IP-centric.
.Pp
Fine-grained locking was added in
.Fx 5.2 .
.Sh BUGS
The
.Fn pfil_hook_get
function
is only safe for internal use.
.Pp
.Fx
implements only hooks for
.Dv AF_INET
and
.Dv AF_INET6 .
Packets diverted through these hooks have data in
host byte order contrary to the above statements.
.Pp
The
.Xr if_bridge 4
diverts
.Dv AF_INET
and
.Dv AF_INET6
traffic according to its sysctl settings, but contrary to the above
statements, the data is provided in host byte order.
.Pp
When a
.Vt pfil_head
is being modified, no traffic is diverted
(to avoid deadlock).
This means that traffic may be dropped unconditionally for a short period
of time.
.Fn pfil_run_hooks
will return
.Er ENOBUFS
to indicate this.
