.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Andrew R. Reiter
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING,
.\" BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES;
.\" LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED
.\" AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
.\" OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 25, 2001 
.Dt PRINTF 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm printf ,
.Nm uprintf  ,
.Nm tprintf
.Nd formatted output conversion
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/types.h>
.Fd #include <sys/systm.h>
.Ft int
.Fn printf "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft void
.Fn tprintf "struct proc *p" "int pri" "const char *fmt" "..."
.Ft int
.Fn uprintf "const char *fmt" "..."
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Xr printf 9
family of functions are similar to the
.Xr printf 3
family of functions.
The three functions each use a different output stream.
The
.Fn uprintf
function outputs to the currect process' controlling tty, while 
.Fn printf
writes to the console as well as to the logging facility.  
The
.Fn tprintf
function outputs to the tty associated with the process
.Fa p
and the logging facility if
.Fa pri
is not \&-1.
.Pp 
Each of these related functions use the 
.Fa fmt
parameter in the same manner as
.Xr printf 3 .
However,
.Xr printf 9
adds two other conversion specifiers.
.Pp
The 
.Cm \&%b 
identifier expects two arguments: an
.Ft int
and a
.Ft char * .
These are used as a register value and a print mask for decoding bitmasks.
The print mask is made up of two parts: the base and the 
arguments.
The base value is the output base expressed as an integer value;
for example, \\10 gives octal and \\20 gives hexadecimal.
The arguments are made up of a sequence of bit identifiers.
Each bit identifier begins with an integer value which is the number of the
bit this identifier describes.
The rest of the identifier is a string of characters containing the name of
the bit.
The string is terminated by either the bit number at the start of the next
bit identifier or nul for the last bit identifier.
.Pp
The 
.Cm \&%D
identifier is meant to assist in hexdumps.
It requires two arguments: a
.Ft u_char *
pointer and a
.Ft char *
string.
The memory pointed to be the pointer is output in hexadecimal one byte at
a time.
The string is used as a delimiter between individual bytes.
If present, a width directive will specify the number of bytes to display.
By default, 16 bytes of data are output.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn printf
and the
.Fn uprintf
functions return the number of characters displayed.
.Sh EXAMPLES
This example demonstrates the use of the \&%b and \&%D conversion specifiers.
The function
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void
printf_test(void)
{

	printf("reg=%b\\n", 3, "\\10\\2BITTWO\\1BITONE\\n");
	printf("out: %4D\\n", "AAAA", ":");
}
.Ed
.Pp
will produce the following output:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
reg=3<BITTWO,BITONE>
out: 41:41:41:41
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr printf 3
