.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Joseph Koshy <jkoshy@FreeBSD.org>
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.Dd August 18, 2023
.Dt PRISON_CHECK 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm prison_check
.Nd determine if subjects may see entities according to jail restrictions
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/jail.h
.Ft int
.Fn prison_check "struct ucred *cred1" "struct ucred *cred2"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This function determines if a subject with credentials
.Fa cred1
is denied access to subjects or objects with credentials
.Fa cred2
according to the policy that a subject can see subjects or objects in its own
jail or any sub-jail of it.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The
.Fn prison_check
function
returns
.Er ESRCH
if
.Fa cred2
is not in the same jail or a sub-jail of that of
.Fa cred1 .
In all other cases,
.Fn prison_check
returns zero.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr jail 2
