.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2000 Jonathan M. Bresler
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 14, 2000
.Os
.Dt SPLASSERT 9
.Sh NAME
.Nm SPLASSERT
.Nd kernel spl level verification macro
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd options INVARIANTS
.Cd options INVARIANT_SUPPORT
.Fn SPLASSERT level "const char *msg"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Bf -symbolic
This API is deprecated.
Use mutexes to protect data structures instead.
See
.Xr mutex 9
for more information.
.Ef
.Pp
In a kernel compiled with both "options INVARIANTS"
and "options INVARIANT_SUPPORT",
the
.Fn SPLASSERT
macro compares the current spl level of the kernel with the spl
.Fa level
specified in the macro
.Fn SPLASSERT .
If the specified
.Fa level
is not active
.Fn SPLASSERT
calls the
.Fn KASSERT
macro with the
.Fa msg ,
terminating the running system.
.Pp
In a kernel that does not have both "options INVARIANTS"
and "options INVARIANT_SUPPORT",
the
.Fn SPLASSERT
macro is defined to be a no-op.
.Pp
The behaviour of
.Fn SPLASSERT
is tunable by means of the
.Xr sysctl 8
knob kern.splassertmode.
When set to 0 the
.Fn SPLASSERT
macro is defined to be a no-op.
When set to 1 the
.Fn SPLASSERT
macro is defined to log information to the console.
When set to 2 the
.Fn SPLASSERT
macro is defined to
.Xr panic 9 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
The kernel function
.Fn rtalloc
must be called at
.Fn splnet :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void
rtalloc(ro)
	register struct route *ro;
{
	SPLASSERT(net, "rtalloc()");
	rtalloc_ign(ro, 0UL);
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr config 8 ,
.Xr CONDSPLASSERT 9 ,
.Xr KASSERT 9 ,
.Xr panic 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Jonathan M. Bresler
.Aq jmb@FreeBSD.org .
