.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2007 Robert N. M. Watson
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd February 27, 2007
.Dt STACK 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm stack
.Nd kernel thread stack tracing routines
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h>
.In sys/stack.h
.Pp
In kernel configuration files:
.Cd "options DDB"
.Ft struct stack *
.Fn stack_create "void"
.Ft void
.Fn stack_destroy "struct stack *st"
.Ft int
.Fn stack_put "struct stack *st" "vm_offset_t pc"
.Ft void
.Fn stack_copy "struct stack *src" "struct stack dst"
.Ft void
.Fn stack_zero "struct stack *st"
.Ft void
.Fn stack_print "struct stack *st"
.Ft void
.Fn stack_sbuf_print "struct sbuf sb*" "struct stack *st"
.Ft void
.Fn stack_save "struct stack *st"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
KPI allows querying of kernel stack trace information and the automated
generation of kernel stack trace strings for the purposes of debugging and
tracing.
.Nm
relies on the presence of
.Xr DDB 4 ,
and all use of these functions must be made conditional on
.Nm DDB
being compiled in the kernel.
.Pp
Each stack trace is described by a
.Vt "struct stack" .
Before a trace may be created or otherwise manipulated, storage for the trace
must be allocated with
.Fn stack_create ,
which may sleep.
Memory associated with a trace may be freed by calling
.Fn stack_destroy .
.Pp
A trace of the current kernel thread's call stack may be captured using
.Fn stack_save .
.Pp
.Fn stack_print
may be used to print a stack trace using the kernel
.Xr printf 9 .
.Pp
.Fn stack_sbuf_print
may be used to construct a human-readable string, including conversion (where
possible) from a simple kernel instruction pointer to a named symbol and
offset.
The argument
.Ar sb
must be an initialized
.Dv struct sbuf
as described in
.Xr sbuf 9 .
This function may sleep if an auto-extending
.Dv struct sbuf
is used.
.Pp
The utility functions
.Nm stack_zero ,
.Nm stack_copy ,
and
.Nm stack_put
may be used to manipulate stack data structures directly.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr DDB 4 ,
.Xr printf 9 ,
.Xr sbuf 9
.Sh AUTHORS
.An -nosplit
The
.Xr stack 9
function suite was created by
.An Antoine Brodin .
.Pp
This manual page was written by
.An Robert Watson .
