.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 24, 1996
.Os
.Dt VFS_MOUNT 9
.Sh NAME
.Nm VFS_MOUNT
.Nd mount a file system
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/mount.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VFS_MOUNT "struct mount *mp" "char *path" "caddr_t data" "struct nameidata *ndp" "struct thread *td"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Mount a file system into the system's namespace.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width data
.It Fa mp
Structure representing the file system.
.It Fa path
Pathname where the file system is being mounted.
.It Fa data
File system specific data.  This should be read into the kernel using
.Xr copyin 9 .
.It Fa ndp
Contains the result of a
.Xr namei 9
call on the pathname of the mountpoint.
.It Fa td
Thread which is mounting the file system.
.El
.Pp
This is called both to mount new file systems and to change the
attributes of an existing file system.  If the
.Dv MNT_UPDATE
flag is set in
.Fa mp->mnt_flag
then the file system should update its internal state from the value of
.Fa mp->mnt_flag .
This can be used, for instance, to convert a read-only file system to
read-write.
It is also used by
.Xr mountd 8
to update the NFS export information for the file system.
.Pp
If the
.Dv MNT_UPDATE
flag is not specified, then this is a newly mounted file system.  The
file system code should allocate and initialize
any private data needed to represent
the file system (it can use the
.Fa mp->mnt_data
field to store this information).
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr VFS 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
