.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 21, 2001
.Dt VFSCONF 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vfsconf
.Nd "vfs configuration information"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/mount.h
.Ft int
.Fn vfs_register "struct vfsconf *vfc"
.Ft int
.Fn vfs_unregister "struct vfsconf *vfc"
.Ft int
.Fn vfs_modevent "module_t mod" "int type" "void *data"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
Each filesystem type known to the kernel has a vfsconf structure that contains the
information required to create a new mount of that filesystems type.
.Bd -literal
	struct vfsconf {
		struct	vfsops *vfc_vfsops;	/* filesystem operations vector */
		char	vfc_name[MFSNAMELEN];	/* filesystem type name */
		int	vfc_typenum;		/* historic filesystem type number */
		int	vfc_refcount;		/* number mounted of this type */
		int	vfc_flags;		/* permanent flags */
		struct	vfsconf *vfc_next;	/* next in list */
	};

.Ed
When a new filesystem is mounted
.Fn vfs_mount
does a lookup of the vfcconf structure by its name, and if it is not already registered,
attempts to load a kernel module for it.
The filesystem operations for the new mount point are taken from vfc_vfsops, and mnt_vfc
in the mount structure is made to point directly at the vfcconf structure for the
filesystem type.
The filesystem type number is taken from vfs_typenum which was assigned in
.Fn vfs_register ,
and the mount flags are taken from a mask of vfc_flags.
Each time a filesystem of a given type is mounted vfc_refcount is incremented.
.Pp
.Fn vfs_register
takes a new vfsconf structure and adds it to the list of existing filesystems.
If the type has not already been registered it is initialize by calling the
.Fn vfs_init
function in the filesystem operations vector.
.Fn vfs_register
also updates the oid's of any sysctl nodes for this filesystem type
to be the same as the newly assigned type number.
.Pp
.Fn vfs_unregister
unlinks
.Fa vfc
from the list of registered filesystem types if there are currently no mounted instances.
If the
.Fn vfs_uninit
function in the filesystems initialization vector is defined it is called.
.Pp
.Fn vfs_modevent
is registered by
.Fn VFS_SET
to handle the loading and unloading of filesystem kernel modules.
In the case of
.Dv MOD_LOAD
.Fn vfs_register
is called.
In the case of
.Dv MOD_UNLOAD
.Fn vfs_unregister
is called.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn vfs_register
returns 0 if successful; otherwise,
.Dv EEXIST
is returned indicating that the filesystem type has already been registered.
.Pp
.Fn vfs_unregister
returns 0 if successful.
If no vfsconf entry can be found matching the name in
.Fa vfc ,
.Dv EINVAL
is returned.
If the reference count of mounted instances of the filesystem type is not zero
.Dv EBUSY
is returned.
If
.Fn vfs_uninit
is called any errors it returns will be returned by
.Fn vfs_unregister .
.Pp
.Fn vfs_modevent
returns the result of the call to
.Fn vfs_register
or
.Fn vfs_unregister
whatever the case.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vfs_rootmountalloc 9 ,
.Xr vfs_mount ,
.Xr VFS_SET 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Chad David Aq davidc@acns.ab.ca .
