.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 21, 2001
.Dt VGONE 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vgone
.Nm vgonel
.Nd "prepare a vnode for reuse"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft void
.Fn vgone "struct vnode *vp"
.Ft void
.Fn vgonel "struct vnod *vp" "struct thread *td"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn vgone
and
.Fn vgonel
prepare a vnode for reuse by another filesystem.
The preparation includes the cleaning of all filesystem specific data and
the removal from its mount point vnode list.
.Pp
If the vnode has a usecount of zero, and its
.Dv VDOOMED
flag is not set it is moved to the head of the free list as in most cases the vnode
is about to be reused, or its filesystem being unmounted.
.Pp
The difference between
.Fn vgone
and
.Fn vgonel
is that
.Fn vgone
locks the vnode interlock and then calls
.Fn vgonel
while
.Fn vgonel
expects the interlock to already be locked.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vclean 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Chad David Aq davidc@acns.ab.ca .
