.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2003 Bruce M Simpson <bms@spc.org>
.\" Copyright (c) 2021 The FreeBSD Foundation, Inc.
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Parts of this documentation were written by
.\" Konstantin Belousov <kib@FreeBSD.org> under sponsorship
.\" from the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd January 23, 2021
.Dt VM_MAP_PROTECT 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_map_protect
.Nd apply protection bits to a virtual memory region
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_map.h
.Ft int
.Fo vm_map_protect
.Fa "vm_map_t map"
.Fa "vm_offset_t start"
.Fa "vm_offset_t end"
.Fa "vm_prot_t new_prot"
.Fa "vm_prot_t new_maxprot"
.Fa "int flags"
.Fc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn vm_map_protect
function sets the protection bits and maximum protection bits of the address
region bounded by
.Fa start
and
.Fa end
within the map
.Fa map .
.Pp
If the
.Fa flags
argument has the
.Dv VM_MAP_PROTECT_SET_PROT
bit set, then the effective protection is set to
.Fa new_prot .
.Pp
If the
.Fa flags
argument has the
.Dv VM_MAP_PROTECT_SET_MAXPROT
bit set, then the maximum protection is set to
.Fa new_maxprot .
Protection bits not included into
.Fa new_maxprot
will be cleared from existing entries.
.Pp
The values specified by
.Fa new_prot
and
.Fa new_maxprot
are not allowed to include any protection bits that are not set in existing
.Va max_protection
on every entry within the range.
The operation will fail if this condition is violated.
For instance, this prevents upgrading a shared mapping of a read-only file
from read-only to read-write.
.Pp
The specified range must not contain sub-maps.
.Sh IMPLEMENTATION NOTES
The function acquires a lock on the
.Fa map
for the duration, by calling
.Xr vm_map_lock 9 .
Also, any in-progress wiring operation on the map affecting the specified
range will cause
.Nm
to sleep, waiting for completion.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Bl -tag -width "Dv KERN_PROTECTION_FAILURE"
.It Dv KERN_SUCCESS
The specified protection bits were set successfully.
.It Dv KERN_INVALID_ARGUMENT
A sub-map entry was encountered in the range,
.It Dv KERN_PROTECTION_FAILURE
The value of
.Fa new_prot
or
.Fa new_maxprot
exceed
.Va max_protection
for an entry within the range.
.It Dv KERN_PROTECTION_FAILURE
The map does not allow simultaneous setting of write and execute permissions,
but
.Fa new_prot
has both
.Dv VM_PROT_WRITE
and
.Dv VM_PROT_EXECUTE
set.
.It Dv KERN_RESOURCE_SHORTAGE
A copy-on-write mapping is transitioned from read-only to
read-write, and not enough swap space is available to back the
copied pages.
.It Dv KERN_OUT_OF_BOUNDS
Both new protection and new maximum protection updates were requested,
but the specified
.Fa new_prot
is not a subset of
.Fa new_maxprot .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vm_map 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Bruce M Simpson Aq Mt bms@spc.org .
