.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2001 Chad David <davidc@acns.ab.ca>. All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer as
.\"    the first lines of this file unmodified other than the possible
.\"    addition of one or more copyright notices.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice(s), this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) ``AS IS'' AND ANY
.\" EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED
.\" WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
.\" DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER(S) BE LIABLE FOR ANY
.\" DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES
.\" (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
.\" SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
.\" CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
.\" DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd July 14, 2001
.Dt VM_PAGE_BUSY 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm vm_page_busy ,
.Nm vm_page_flash ,
.Nm vm_page_wakeup
.Nd "handle the busying and unbusying of a page"
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In vm/vm.h
.In vm/vm_page.h
.Ft void
.Fn vm_page_busy "vm_page_t m"
.Ft void
.Fn vm_page_flash "vm_page_t m"
.Ft void
.Fn vm_page_wakeup "vm_page_t m"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
These functions handle the busying, unbusying and notification of the unbusying
of a page.
.Pp
.Fn vm_page_busy
sets the
.Dv PG_BUSY
flag in the page.
.Pp
.Fn vm_page_flash
checks to see if there is anybody waiting on the page
.Dv ( PG_WANTED
will be set), and if so, clears the
.Dv PG_WANTED
flag and notifies whoever is waiting via
.Fn wakeup .
.Pp
.Fn vm_page_wakeup
clears the
.Dv PG_BUSY
flag on the page, and calls
.Fn vm_page_flash
in case somebody has been waiting for it.
.Pp
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vm_page_sleep_busy 9 ,
.Xr wakeup 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Chad David Aq davidc@acns.ab.ca .
