.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\" Copyright 2003, Garrett A. Wollman
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 12, 2014
.Dt VOP_GETPAGES 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_GETPAGES ,
.Nm VOP_PUTPAGES
.Nd read or write VM pages from a file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.In vm/vm.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES "struct vnode *vp" "vm_page_t *ma" "int count" "int reqpage"
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_PUTPAGES "struct vnode *vp" "vm_page_t *ma" "int count" "int sync" "int *rtvals"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES
method is called to read in pages of virtual memory which are backed by
ordinary files.
If other adjacent pages are backed by adjacent regions of the same file,
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES
is requested to read those pages as well, although it is not required to
do so.
The
.Fn VOP_PUTPAGES
method does the converse; that is to say, it writes out adjacent dirty
pages of virtual memory.
.Pp
On entry, the vnode lock is held but neither the page queue nor VM object
locks are held.
Both methods return in the same state on both success and error returns.
.Pp
The arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width reqpage
.It Fa vp
The file to access.
.It Fa ma
Pointer to the first element of an array of pages representing a
contiguous region of the file to be read or written.
.It Fa count
The number of bytes that should be read into the pages of the array.
.It Fa sync
.Dv VM_PAGER_PUT_SYNC
if the write should be synchronous.
.It Fa rtvals
An array of VM system result codes indicating the status of each
page written by
.Fn VOP_PUTPAGES .
.It Fa reqpage
The index in the page array of the requested page; i.e., the one page which
the implementation of this method must handle.
.El
.Pp
The status of the
.Fn VOP_PUTPAGES
method is returned on a page-by-page basis in the array
.Fa rtvals[] .
The possible status values are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width VM_PAGER_ERROR
.It Dv VM_PAGER_OK
The page was successfully written.
The implementation must call
.Xr vm_page_undirty 9
to mark the page as clean.
.It Dv VM_PAGER_PEND
The page was scheduled to be written asynchronously.
When the write completes, the completion callback should
call
.Xr vm_object_pip_wakeup 9
and
.Xr vm_page_sunbusy 9
to clear the busy flag and awaken any other threads waiting for this page,
in addition to calling
.Xr vm_page_undirty 9 .
.It Dv VM_PAGER_BAD
The page was entirely beyond the end of the backing file.
This condition should not be possible if the vnode's file system
is correctly implemented.
.It Dv VM_PAGER_ERROR
The page could not be written because of an error on the underlying storage
medium or protocol.
.It Dv VM_PAGER_FAIL
Treated identically to
.Dv VM_PAGER_ERROR .
.It Dv VM_PAGER_AGAIN
The page was not handled by this request.
.El
.Pp
The
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES
method is expected to release any pages in
.Fa ma
that it does not successfully handle, by calling
.Xr vm_page_free 9 .
When it succeeds,
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES
must set the valid bits appropriately.
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES
must keep
.Fa reqpage
busy.
It must unbusy all other successfully handled pages and put them
on appropriate page queue(s).
For example,
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES
may either activate a page (if its wanted bit is set)
or deactivate it (otherwise), and finally call
.Xr vm_page_xunbusy 9
to arouse any threads currently waiting for the page to be faulted in.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
If it successfully reads
.Fa ma[reqpage] ,
.Fn VOP_GETPAGES
returns
.Dv VM_PAGER_OK ;
otherwise,
.Dv VM_PAGER_ERROR .
By convention, the return value of
.Fn VOP_PUTPAGES
is
.Fa rtvals[0] .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vm_object_pip_wakeup 9 ,
.Xr vm_page_free 9 ,
.Xr vm_page_sunbusy 9 ,
.Xr vm_page_undirty 9 ,
.Xr vm_page_xunbusy 9 ,
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Doug Rabson
and then substantially rewritten by
.An Garrett Wollman .
