.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $Id: VOP_RENAME.9,v 1.5 1997/04/13 14:48:59 bde Exp $
.\"
.Dd July 24, 1996
.Os
.Dt VOP_RENAME 9
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_RENAME
.Nd rename a file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Fd #include <sys/param.h>
.Fd #include <sys/vnode.h>
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_RENAME "struct vnode *fdvp" "struct vnode *fvp" "struct componentname *fcnp" "struct vnode *tdvp" "struct vnode *tvp" "struct componentname *tcnp" 
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This renames a file and possibly changes its parent directory.
If the destination object exists, it will be removed first.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width fdvp
.It Ar fdvp
the vnode of the old parent directory
.It Ar fvp
the vnode of the file to be renamed
.It Ar fcnp
pathname information about the file's current name
.It Ar tdvp
the vnode of the new parent directory
.It Ar tvp
the vnode of the target file (if it exists)
.It Ar tcnp
pathname information about the file's new name
.El
.Sh LOCKS
The destination directory and file (if it exists) should be locked on entry.  
The source directory and file
will be released on exit.
The destination directory and file (if it exists) will be unlocked
and released on exit.
.Sh PSEUDOCODE
.Bd -literal
int
vop_rename(struct vnode *fdvp, struct vnode *fvp, struct componentname *fcnp,
	   struct vnode *tdvp, struct vnode *tvp, struct componentname *tcnp)
{
    int doingdirectory = 0;
    int error = 0;

    /*
     * Check for cross-device rename.
     */
    if (fvp->v_mount != tdvp->v_mount) {
	error = EXDEV;
    abortit:
	VOP_ABORTOP(tdvp, tcnp);
	if (tdvp == tvp)
	    vrele(tdvp);
	else
	    vput(tdvp);
	if (tvp)
	    vput(tvp);
	VOP_ABORTOP(fdvp, fcnp);
	vrele(fdvp);
	vrele(fvp);
	return error;
    }

    if (tvp exists and is immutable) {
	error = EPERM;
	goto abortit;
    }

    /*
     * Check if just deleting a link name.
     */
    if (fvp == tvp) {
	if (fvp->v_type == VDIR) {
	    error = EINVAL;
	    goto abortit;
	}

	/*
	 * Release destination.
	 */
	VOP_ABORTOP(tdvp, tcnp);
	vput(tdvp);
	vput(tvp);

	/*
	 * Delete source.  Pretty bizarre stuff.
	 */
	vrele(fdvp);
	vrele(fvp);
	fcnp->cn_flags &= ~MODMASK;
	fcnp->cn_flags |= LOCKPARENT | LOCKLEAF;
	fcnp->cn_nameiop = DELETE;
	VREF(fdvp);
	error = relookup(fdvp, &fvp, fcnp);
	if (error == 0)
	    vrele(fdvp);
	return VOP_REMOVE(fdvp, fvp, fcnp);
    }

    if (fvp is immutable) {
	error = EPERM;
	goto abortit;
    }

    error = VOP_LOCK(fvp);
    if (error)
	goto abortit;

    if (vp is a directory) {
	/*
	 * Avoid ".", "..", and aliases of "." for obvious reasons.
	 */
	if ((fcnp->cn_namelen == 1 && fcnp->cn_nameptr[0] == '.')
	    || fdvp == fvp
	    || ((fcnp->cn_flags | tcnp->cn_flags) & ISDOTDOT)) {
	    VOP_UNLOCK(fvp);
	    error = EINVAL;
	    goto abortit;
	}
	doingdirectory = 1;
    }
    vrele(fdvp);

    /*
     * Bump link count on fvp while we are moving stuff around.  If we
     * crash before completing the work, the link count may be wrong
     * but correctable.
     */
    ...;

    /*
     * If ".." must be changed (ie the directory gets a new
     * parent) then the source directory must not be in the
     * directory hierarchy above the target, as this would
     * orphan everything below the source directory. Also
     * the user must have write permission in the source so
     * as to be able to change "..".
     */
    error = VOP_ACCESS(fvp, VWRITE, tcnp->cn_cred, tcnp->cn_proc);
    VOP_UNLOCK(fvp);
    if (doingdirectory && fdvp != tdvp) {
	/*
	 * Check for pathname conflict.
	 */
	...;
    }

    /*
     * If the target doesn't exist, link the target to the source and
     * unlink the source.  Otherwise, rewrite the target directory to
     * reference the source and remove the original entry.
     */
    if (tvp == NULL) {
	/*
	 * Account for ".." in new directory.
	 */
	if (doingdirectory && fdvp != tdvp) {
	    /*
	     * Increase link count of tdvp.
	     */
	    ...;
	}
	
	/*
	 * Add name in new directory.
	 */
	...;

	if (error) {
	    if (doingdirectory && fdvp != tdvp) {
		/*
		 * Decrease link count if tdvp.
		 */
		...;
	    }
	    goto bad;
	}
	vput(tdvp);
    } else {
	/*
	 * Target must be empty if a directory and have no links
	 * to it. Also, ensure source and target are compatible
	 * (both directories, or both not directories).
	 */
	if (tvp is a directory) {
	    if (tvp is not empty) {
		error = ENOTEMPTY;
		goto bad;
	    }
	    if (!doingdirectory) {
		error = ENOTDIR;
		goto bad;
	    }
	    /*
	     * Update name cache since directory is going away.
	     */
	    cache_purge(tdvp);
	} else if (doingdirectory) {
	    error = ENOTDIR;
	    goto bad;
	}

	/*
	 * Change name tcnp in tdvp to point at fvp.
	 */
	...;

	/*
	 * If the target directory is in same directory as the source
	 * directory, decrement the link count on the parent of the
	 * target directory.  This accounts for the fact that a
	 * directory links back to its parent with "..".
	 */
	if (doingdirectory && fdvp == tdvp) {
	    /*
	     * Decrement link count of tdvp.
	     */
	    ...;
	}
	vput(tdvp);

	/*
	 * Decrement the link count of tvp since the directory no
	 * longer points at it.
	 */
	...;
	if (doingdirectory) {
	    /*
	     * Clean up the old directory tvp.
	     */
	    ...;
	}
	vput(tvp);
    }

    /*
     * Unlink the source.  If a directory was moved to a new parent,
     * update its ".." entry.  Gobs of ugly UFS code omitted here. 
     */
    ...;

bad:
    if (tvp)
	vput(tvp);
    vput(tdvp);
out:
    if (VOP_LOCK(fvp) == 0) {
	/*
	 * Decrement link count of fvp.
	 */
	...;
        vput(fvp);
    } else
	vrele(fvp);

    return error;
}
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er EPERM
the file is immutable
.It Bq Er EXDEV
cross device move
.It Bq Er EINVAL
illegal directory rename
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
attempt to rename a directory to a file or vice versa
.It Bq Er ENOTEMPTY
attempt to remove a directory which is not empty
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Doug Rabson .
