.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 1996 Doug Rabson
.\"
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" This program is free software.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE DEVELOPERS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES
.\" OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.
.\" IN NO EVENT SHALL THE DEVELOPERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT,
.\" INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
.\" NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
.\" DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
.\" THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
.\" (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF
.\" THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd November 24, 1997
.Os
.Dt VOP_LOOKUP 9
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_LOOKUP
.Nd lookup a component of a pathname
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.In sys/namei.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_LOOKUP "struct vnode *dvp" "struct vnode **vpp" "struct componentname *cnp"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This entry point looks up a single pathname component in a given directory.
.Pp
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width vpp
.It Ar dvp
the locked vnode of the directory to search
.It Ar vpp
the address of a variable where the resulting locked vnode should be stored
.It Ar cnp
the pathname component to be searched for
.El
.Pp
.Fa Cnp
is a pointer to a componentname structure defined as follows:
.Bd -literal
struct componentname {
	/*
	 * Arguments to lookup.
	 */
	u_long	cn_nameiop;	/* namei operation */
	u_long	cn_flags;	/* flags to namei */
	struct	proc *cn_proc;	/* process requesting lookup */
	struct	ucred *cn_cred;	/* credentials */
	/*
	 * Shared between lookup and commit routines.
	 */
	char	*cn_pnbuf;	/* pathname buffer */
	char	*cn_nameptr;	/* pointer to looked up name */
	long	cn_namelen;	/* length of looked up component */
	u_long	cn_hash;	/* hash value of looked up name */
	long	cn_consume;	/* chars to consume in lookup() */
};
.Ed
.Pp
Convert a component of a pathname into a pointer to a locked vnode.
This is a very central and rather complicated routine.
If the filesystem is not maintained in a strict tree hierarchy,
this can result in a deadlock situation.
.Pp
The
.Fa cnp->cn_nameiop
argument is
.Dv LOOKUP ,
.Dv CREATE ,
.Dv RENAME ,
or
.Dv DELETE
depending on the intended use of the object.
When
.Dv CREATE ,
.Dv RENAME ,
or
.Dv DELETE
is specified, information usable in
creating, renaming, or deleting a directory entry may be calculated.
.Pp
Overall outline of VOP_LOOKUP:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
Check accessibility of directory.
Look for name in cache, if found, then return name.
Search for name in directory, goto to found or notfound as appropriate.
.Ed
.Pp
notfound:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
If creating or renaming and at end of pathname,
return
.Er EJUSTRETURN ,
leaving info on available slots else return
.Er ENOENT .
.Ed
.Pp
found:
.Bd -ragged -offset indent
If at end of path and deleting, return information to allow delete.
If at end of path and renaming, lock target
inode and return info to allow rename.
If not at end, add name to cache; if at end and neither creating
nor deleting, add name to cache.
.Ed
.Sh LOCKS
The directory,
.Fa dvp
should be locked on entry.
If an error (note: the return value
.Er EJUSTRETURN
is not considered an error)
is detected, it will be returned locked.
Otherwise, it will be unlocked unless both
.Dv LOCKPARENT
and
.Dv ISLASTCN
are specified in
.Fa cnp->cn_flags .
If an entry is found in the directory, it will be returned locked.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned with
.Fa *vpp
set to the locked vnode of the file if the component is found.
If the component being searched for is ".", then the vnode just has
an extra reference added to it with
.Xr vref 9 .
The caller must take care to release the locks appropriately in this
case.
.Pp
If the component is not found and the operation is
.Dv CREATE
or
.Dv RENAME ,
the flag
.Dv ISLASTCN
is specified and the operation would succeed, the special return value
.Er EJUSTRETURN
is returned.
Otherwise, an appropriate error code is returned.
.Sh PSEUDOCODE
.Bd -literal
int
vop_lookup(struct vnode *dvp,
	   struct vnode **vpp,
	   struct componentname *cnp)
{
    int error;
    int nameiop = cnp->cn_nameiop;
    int flags = cnp->cn_flags;
    int lockparent = flags & LOCKPARENT;
    int islastcn = flags & ISLASTCN;
    struct vnode *vp = NULL;

    /*
     * Check accessibility of directory.
     */
    if (dvp->v_type != VDIR)
	return ENOTDIR;

    error = VOP_ACCESS(dvp, VEXEC, cred, cnp->cn_proc);
    if (error)
	return (error);

    if (islastcn && (dvp->v_mount->mnt_flag & MNT_RDONLY) &&
	(cnp->cn_nameiop == DELETE || cnp->cn_nameiop == RENAME))
	return (EROFS);

    /*
     * Check name cache for directory/name pair.  This returns ENOENT
     * if the name is known not to exist, -1 if the name was found, or
     * zero if not.
     */
    error = cache_lookup(dvp, vpp, cnp);
    if (error) {
	int vpid;

	if (error = ENOENT)
	    return error;

	vp = *vpp;
	if (dvp == vp) {	/* lookup on "." */
	    VREF(vp);
	    error = 0;
	} else if (flags & ISDOTDOT) {
            /*
	     * We need to unlock the directory before getting
	     * the locked vnode for ".." to avoid deadlocks.
	     */
	    VOP_UNLOCK(dvp);
	    error = vget(vp, 1);
	    if (!error) {
		if (lockparent && islastcn)
		    error = VOP_LOCK(dvp);
	    }
	} else {
	    error = vget(vp, 1);
	    if (error || !(lockparent && islastcn)) {
		VOP_UNLOCK(dvp);
	    }
	}

	/*
	 * Check that the capability number did not change
	 * while we were waiting for the lock.
	 */
	if (!error) {
	    if (vpid == vp->v_id) {
		/*
		 * dvp is locked if lockparent && islastcn.
		 * vp is locked.
		 */
		return (0);
	    }
	    vput(vp);

	    if (dvp != vp && lockparent && islastcn)
		VOP_UNLOCK(pdp);
	}

	/*
	 * Re-lock dvp for the directory search below.
	 */
	error = VOP_LOCK(dvp);
	if (error) {
	    return (error);
	}

	*vpp = NULL;
    }

    /*
     * Search dvp for the component cnp->cn_nameptr.
     */
    ...;

    if (!found) {
	if ((nameiop == CREATE || nameiop == RENAME)
	    && islastcn
	    && directory dvp has not been removed) {
	    /*
	     * Check for write access on directory.
	     */

	    /*
	     * Possibly record the position of a slot in the directory
	     * large enough for the new component name.  This can be
	     * recorded in the vnode private data for dvp.
	     * Set the SAVENAME flag to hold onto the pathname for use
	     * later in VOP_CREATE or VOP_RENAME.
	     */
	    cnp->cn_flags |= SAVENAME;
	    if (!lockparent)
		/*
		 * Note that the extra data recorded above is only
		 * useful if lockparent is specified.
		 */
		VOP_UNLOCK(dvp);

	    return EJUSTRETURN;
	}

	/*
	 * Consider inserting name into cache.
	 */
	if ((cnp->cn_flags & MAKEENTRY) && nameiop != CREATE)
	    cache_enter(dvp, NULL, cnp);

	return ENOENT;
    } else {
	/*
	 * If deleting, and at end of pathname, return parameters
	 * which can be used to remove file.  If the wantparent flag
	 * isn't set, we return only the directory, otherwise we go on
	 * and lock the inode, being careful with ".".
	 */
	if (nameiop == DELETE && islastcn) {
	    /*
	     * Check for write access on directory.
	     */
	    error = VOP_ACCESS(dvp, VWRITE, cred, cnp->cn_proc);
	    if (error)
		return (error);

	    if (found entry is same as dvp) {
		VREF(dvp);
		*vpp = dvp;
		return 0;
	    }

	    error = VFS_VGET(dvp->v_mount, ..., &vp);
	    if (error)
		return error;

	    if (directory is sticky
		&& cred->cr_uid != 0
		&& cred->cr_uid != owner of dvp
		&& owner of vp != cred->cr_uid) {
		vput(vp);
		return EPERM;
	    }
	    *vpp = vp;
	    if (!lockparent)
		VOP_UNLOCK(dvp);

	    return 0;
	}

	/*
	 * If rewriting (RENAME), return the inode and the
	 * information required to rewrite the present directory
	 * Must get inode of directory entry to verify it's a
	 * regular file, or empty directory.
	 */
	if (nameiop == RENAME && wantparent && islastcn) {
	    error = VOP_ACCESS(dvp, VWRITE, cred, cnp->cn_proc);
	    if (error)
		return (error);

	    /*
	     * Check for "."
	     */
	    if (found entry is same as dvp)
		return EISDIR;

	    error = VFS_VGET(dvp->v_mount, ..., &vp);
	    if (error)
		return error;
	    *vpp = vp;
	    /*
	     * Save the name for use in VOP_RENAME later.
	     */
	    cnp->cn_flags |= SAVENAME;
	    if (!lockparent)
		VOP_UNLOCK(dvp);

	    return 0;
	}

	/*
	 * Step through the translation in the name.  We do not `vput' the
	 * directory because we may need it again if a symbolic link
	 * is relative to the current directory.  Instead we save it
	 * unlocked as "pdp".  We must get the target inode before unlocking
	 * the directory to insure that the inode will not be removed
	 * before we get it.  We prevent deadlock by always fetching
	 * inodes from the root, moving down the directory tree. Thus
	 * when following backward pointers ".." we must unlock the
	 * parent directory before getting the requested directory.
	 * There is a potential race condition here if both the current
	 * and parent directories are removed before the VFS_VGET for the
	 * inode associated with ".." returns.  We hope that this occurs
	 * infrequently since we cannot avoid this race condition without
	 * implementing a sophisticated deadlock detection algorithm.
	 * Note also that this simple deadlock detection scheme will not
	 * work if the filesystem has any hard links other than ".."
	 * that point backwards in the directory structure.
	 */
	if (flags & ISDOTDOT) {
	    VOP_UNLOCK(dvp);	/* race to get the inode */
	    error = VFS_VGET(dvp->v_mount, ..., &vp);
	    if (error) {
		VOP_LOCK(dvp);
		return (error);
	    }
	    if (lockparent && islastcn) {
		error = VOP_LOCK(dvp);
		if (error) {
		    vput(vp);
		    return error;
		}
	    }
	    *vpp = vp;
	} else if (found entry is same as dvp) {
	    VREF(dvp);	/* we want ourself, ie "." */
	    *vpp = dvp;
	} else {
	    error = VFS_VGET(dvp->v_mount, ..., &vp);
	    if (error)
		return (error);
	    if (!lockparent || !islastcn)
		VOP_UNLOCK(dvp);
	    *vpp = vp;
	}

	/*
	 * Insert name into cache if appropriate.
	 */
	if (cnp->cn_flags & MAKEENTRY)
	    cache_enter(dvp, *vpp, cnp);
	return (0);
    }
}
.Ed
.Sh ERRORS
.Bl -tag -width Er
.It Bq Er ENOTDIR
The vnode
.Fa dvp
does not represent a directory.
.It Bq Er ENOENT
The component
.Fa dvp
was not found in this directory.
.It Bq Er EACCES
Access for the specified operation is denied.
.It Bq Er EJUSTRETURN
A
.Dv CREATE
or
.Dv RENAME
operation would be successful.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr VOP_ACCESS 9 ,
.Xr VOP_CREATE 9 ,
.Xr VOP_MKDIR 9 ,
.Xr VOP_MKNOD 9 ,
.Xr VOP_RENAME 9 ,
.Xr VOP_SYMLINK 9
.Sh HISTORY
The function
.Nm
appeared in
.Bx 4.3 .
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh AUTHORS
This man page was written by
.An Doug Rabson ,
with some text from comments in
.Pa ufs_lookup.c .
