.\"-
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-2-Clause-FreeBSD
.\"
.\" Copyright (c) 2019 The FreeBSD Foundation
.\"
.\" This documentation was written by BFF Storage Systems, LLC under
.\" sponsorship from the FreeBSD Foundation.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd June 19, 2019
.Dt VOP_BMAP 9
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm VOP_BMAP
.Nd Logical to physical block number conversion
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In sys/param.h
.In sys/vnode.h
.Ft int
.Fn VOP_BMAP "struct vnode *vp" "daddr_t bn" "struct bufobj **bop" "daddr_t *bnp" "int *runp" "int *runb"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
This vnode call is used to lookup the physical block number of the file system's
underlying device where a given logical block of a file is stored.
Its arguments are:
.Bl -tag -width type
.It Fa vp
The vnode of the file.
.It Fa bn
Logical block number within the file identified by
.Fa vp .
.It Fa bop
Return storage for the buffer object associated with the file system's
underlying device.
.It Fa bnp
Return storage for the physical block number.
.It Fa runp
Return storage for the number of succeeding logical blocks that may be
efficiently read at the same time as the requested block.
This will usually be the number of logical blocks whose physical blocks are
contiguously allocated.
However a file system is free to define "efficient" as it see fit.
.It Fa runb
Like
.Fa runp
but for preceding rather than succeeding blocks.
.El
.Pp
Any of the return arguments may be
.Dv NULL
to indicate that the caller does not care about that information.
.Sh LOCKS
The vnode will be locked on entry and should remain locked on return.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
Zero is returned on success, otherwise an error code is returned.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vnode 9
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Fn bmap
function first appeared in
.Bx 4.2 .
.Sh AUTHORS
This manual page was written by
.An Alan Somers .
