.\"-
.\"  Copyright (c) 2010 Gordon Tetlow
.\"  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\"  Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\"  modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\"  are met:
.\"  1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\"  2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"     notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"     documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\"  THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\"  ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\"  IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\"  ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\"  FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\"  DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\"  OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\"  HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\"  LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\"  OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\"  SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd September 1, 2010
.Dt APROPOS 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm apropos ,
.Nm whatis
.Nd keyword search whatis documentation databases
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d
.Ar keyword ...
.Nm whatis
.Op Fl d
.Ar keyword ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility searches a set of databases looking for documentation matching each
.Ar keyword
and displays the results.
The
.Nm whatis
utility does the same search but only on complete words.
.Bl -tag -width ".Fl d"
.It Fl d
Print extra debugging information.
.El
.Pp
The
.Ar keyword
is simply passed to
.Xr grep 1
allowing for extended regular expression matches.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the execution of
.Nm :
.Bl -tag -width ".Ev PAGER"
.It Ev MANLOCALES , MANPATH , PATH
Used to find the location of the
.Nm whatis
database files. See
.Xr manpath 1
for additional information.
.It Ev PAGER
Program used to display files.
If unset,
.Ic "more -s"
is used.
.El
.Sh DIAGNOSTICS
The
.Nm
utility exits 0 if a keyword matched and 1 if no keywords are matched or no
.Nm whatis
databases are found.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr grep 1 ,
.Xr makewhatis 1 ,
.Xr man 1 ,
.Xr manpath 1 ,
.Xr man.conf 5
